The Midyear Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS July Together With a Report to the President THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The Midyear Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS July Together With a Report to the President THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. G Price of single copy cents LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C. July The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith a Midyear Economic Report to the Congress. This is supplementary to the Economic Report of the President of January and is transmitted in accordance with section ( b ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this report I am transmitting a report The Economic Situation at Midyear prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ( in ) Contents Page THE MIDYEAR ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Building our defenses Strengthening the other free nations Expanding and stabilizing the economy Our production goals Production aids Our stabilization goals Taxation Public expenditures Credit policy Voluntary saving Price and wage stabilization Rent control Summary of economic developments in the first half of THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR ( a report to the President by the Council of Economic Advisers ) ( V ) To the Congress of the United States : Our economic problems in this country are now based mainly upon world problems. Our economic tasks are heavy because of the weight of our world responsibility To succeed in our economic job at home we must understand fully our job in world affairs This job is plain. By every means within our power we must continue the search for a just and lasting peace among all peoples We do not seek this peace through the medium of war. We do not seek it through appeasement. And we do not seek it alone. We seek this peace through the international cooperation of all who want sincerely to join in the effort. On these terms the door into a friendly association of nations is open to all But the door is not open to aggression and conquest. To prevent that the combined strength of the free peoples must be made so great that no aggressor will be able to destroy freedom in the world The security of the free world is not a matter of guns alone. It requires also economic political and moral strength. The defense program of the United States embraces all of these In the next days and weeks the Congress will decide the future of this comprehensive defense program In its consideration of military appropriations the Congress will decide whether we as a nation are going to achieve adequate security in the next few years In its consideration of the Mutual Security Program it will decide whether we will continue to join boldly in marshalling the whole strength of the free world in a common resistance to communist aggression In its consideration of the Defense Production Act it will decide whether we will channel our resources effectively to meet the demands of national security In its consideration of that Act and of revenue legislation it will decide whether the line will be held against inflation Throughout the past year we have been going through the transition from a normal peacetime economy to a defense economy. Military production is increasing and schedules are now becoming firm. The expansion of the basic economy to support the defense program is moving forward and additional expansion goals for specific industries are being set. The pattern of economic controls required by the defense program has been generally established Where we go from here depends on the decisions made by the Congress We can drive ahead on the course of the present defense program or we can retreat The safety and welfare of our country require that we drive ahead This Economic Report is therefore a discussion of the kind of defense build-up which we are now undertaking and which I propose we continue to undertake. It is also an analysis of the measures which have been taken or must be taken to strengthen and stabilize the economy to support that build-up We are engaged in a long-term effort The need for military strength did not begin with the Korean war Nor will it end when and if the fighting in Korea ceases The need for building strength was undergoing an urgent review before the attack of June on the Republic of Korea. That event precipitated a quick and clear national decision to enlarge our military strength rapidly This course should have and though no doubt in smaller measure would have been taken anyway We must be ever-mindful that the Soviet imperialists are relentlessly pursuing a long-range plan. Their tactics change but their strategy is clear and persistent. That strategy is to probe for weak spots in the strength or morale of the free people and if a weak spot can be found to strike another blow Whatever happens in Korea we must take into account what is happening in Iran on the borders of Yugoslavia in Indo-China and most of all what we know to be going on inside the Soviet Union itself. The main danger to world peace comes from the Soviet rulers from the growing military force at their disposal and from their proved willingness to use aggression to gain their ends. The military build-up of the Soviet Union which has been continuing since has no other purpose than to blackmail the free world into submission to communist domination. Or if the free world lacks strength or determination to prevent it the purpose is to overrun its members one by one This is the central threat to our country and to every free country in the world. We can not have peace unless this threat is overcome. That is the purpose of our defense program This sustained effort on our part is something new in history. Free men have always been willing to take up arms and to do their utmost in a supreme crisis. But never before have free men in such large numbers acted together in advance to prevent a supreme crisis. Never before on so vast a scale have free men assumed great risks voluntarily so that even greater risks may not descend upon them involuntarily. Never before has there been so deep and widespread in the hearts of mankind the feeling that the price of peace is the willingness to fight for justice This is an effort of great hope and promise. It is a practical means by which we can bring to reality the great vision of world peace under law But this effort like any enterprise on a grand scale will succeed only if we put into it the resources the sweat and toil the unremitting force of will that it requires Our immediate plans must be flexible as we constantly review our progress in the light of changing conditions. Right now for example we are reviewing our immediate goals for military strength and it is quite possible that we shall have to raise them in several important respects But our fundamental course is unaltered. The free world must build the strength moral economic and military that is needed to deter aggression or if aggression comes to defeat it The greatest weakness we could disclose would be vacillation or lack of determination. To win in the contest between justice and aggression the purposes of free men must be clear and persistent We must avoid shifting from one extreme of policy to another with every new development either international or domestic when such developments do not alter the fundamental situation Immediately after the initial Korean aggression there were some extremists both in military and economic affairs. In military affairs these extremists wanted immediately a 10-million-man armed force and a 100billion-dollar-a-year military budget. In economic affairs there were some extremists who wanted to freeze the whole economy in a strait jacket of controls more extensive than anything attempted during World War II Fortunately the saving common sense of the American people avoided these extremes. We embarked upon a substantial build-up of our military strength but without going on a total war footing. We started upon an economic mobilization program which bore a sensible relationship to the size of our defense effort and the likelihood of its long duration. This economic mobilization included measures to expand production and to control inflation. But it wisely did not attempt to mix full economic mobilization with partial military mobilization. That would have gotten our great productive economy all out of joint. It would have made us weaker not stronger Today extremists are pulling in a diametrically opposite direction. At the first signs of a let-down of the conflict in Korea they have commenced to clamor for a reduction in our defense program. On the economic front as soon as there is a slight softening of inflationary pressures these extremists are ready to discard the whole structure of inflationary controls or shoot it full of holes If we were now to heed these extremists it would be an even more costly mistake than to have heeded the extremists of a year ago. We have no reason to believe that the events in Korea have fundamentally changed the basic Soviet intentions. The events at home have not removed the need to expand our economic strength or to overcome the basic inflationary danger We must press on to build our defenses We must press on to strengthen the other free nations We must press on to expand production and prevent inflation Only by pressing forward can we make the vision of peace among all men a lasting reality Building Our Defenses Our defense program is designed to create substantial armed forces ready for action plus the ability to enlarge those forces very rapidly if the need arises. We have almost reached our first goal of 3/a million men and women on active duty. But in the case of many types of weapons we have months and years of hard effort ahead before we will have produced enough modern equipment for our active forces for helping to equip our allies and for the reserve stocks we need We have accomplished large increases in military production since the Korean invasion. Deliveries of hard goods such as aircraft tanks weapons and ammunitions have more than tripled. Nevertheless military output as a whole has moved up somewhat more slowly than scheduled This has been due partly to some shortages such as in machine tools We have been " tooling up " thus far but this stage is now well advanced From this point forward every effort must be exerted to catch up with production schedules and keep abreast of them In the cause of national safety these schedules must be met Our total security program costs have now reached an annual rate of more than billion dollars. In terms of constant prices this is almost twice the level of a year ago and percent above the level of months ago. These costs are scheduled to increase to an annual rate of more than billion dollars by the end of this year and to nearly billion by the middle of The proportion of the Nation 's total output devoted to security purposes which was about percent before Korea and is about percent at present will rise to approximately percent by the end of and will approach percent by a year from now. ( See chart ) These outlays cover pay and subsistence for our military forces deliveries of military goods to our own forces and our allies economic aid to other free nations and other security expenditures. More than percent of the total for the present fiscal year is allotted to building up the military strength of this country. This includes the sums to be spent on our military establishment the atomic energy program stockpiling and other domestic security programs The major part of the scheduled increase of almost billion dollars in the annual rate of security expenditures from the middle of this year to the middle of will involve procurement of aircraft weapons tanks and CHART GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT AND NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAMS 1st HALF OF PRICES During nearly one-half of. our total national output was used for war purposes. The present national security program will at the peak take about one-fifth of the nation 's output of goods and services BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FOREIGN MILITARY AND ECONOMIC AID TOTAL GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ( TOTAL NATIONAL SECURITY 2nd Qtr U 2nd Qtr ^ 2nd Qtr ^ jy SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS other military end items and some of the specialized equipment used in their production. Within the next months hard goods deliveries are scheduled to rise from a monthly rate of about billion dollars to about three times that amount. During the same period aircraft deliveries are to be tripled and the tank-automotive program increased to four times the present rate of deliveries Measured by costs and by the strain on the economy this is a large program. But it is a minimum program measured against the need and is well within our capacity. The accompanying Review by the Council of Economic Advisers reveals in detail thatf with wise policies our economy can support this effort and yet remain sound and grow stronger. Compared with the rise of almost billion dollars in security outlays scheduled for the coming months we expanded such outlays by about billion dollars ( in terms of present prices ) in the first year of our participation in World War II. The program as now scheduled is not expected to absorb at its peak more than about one-fifth of our total output compared with almost half in A year from now the program is expected to require about million men and women directly or indirectly engaged in defense contrasted with about million at the peak of World War II We can not now be sure what our production needs will be beyond that If further aggression does not occur we hope to be able within two or three years to " level off our defense program and to move on to a maintenance basis. At present however our principal concern is not with maintaining military strength. Our principal concern is to build up military strength in the first place We have been moving toward interim goals for Army Navy and Air Force strength. It now appears as we review our strategic situation in the light of world events that these goals may need to be raised whether or not we have an armistice in Korea. The strategic and military studies needed for such decisions have not been completed ; if it is indeed necessary to raise our sights I shall later submit to the Congress requests for the additional funds required Regardless of the need to lift our goals for the active military forces we must move full speed ahead toward our present goals Strengthening the Other Free Nations The defenses of the free nations are inseparable. Our defenses are bound up with the defenses of other free countries in every way strategically economically morally and their defenses are bound up with ours Due partly to historic events since the turn of the century the United States has greater economic strength and potential military power than any ether nation. But with only percent of the free world 's population and only a fraction of its natural resources our difficulties would be enormous if we were cut off from the rest of the free world Western Europe together with Turkey has a population percent greater than ours with a high proportion of skilled workers. It produces one-third of the steel of the free world one-fifth of the aluminum and nearly one-half of the coal. Moreover areas outside the United States in many cases the economically underdeveloped countries produce about percent of the free world 's crude petroleum and about half of its iron ore. They produce about to percent of its lead zinc tungsten and rubber supply and virtually all of its cobalt manganese nickel tin and wool. We are vitally dependent upon imports for many of these products It would be a military disaster to us if these resources fell under hostile domination But it is not only in terms of the possibility of world conflict that we should view this problem. If we establish a secure peace our prosperity will be linked with that of other nations. The economic upbuilding of one part of the world benefits also the other parts. As standards of production and of living rise in one area this provides more markets for the products of other areas and expanding production and markets are the lifeblood of economic progress The moral aspects of this issue are even more important than the economic. The great need of the twentieth century is to achieve a steadily improving morality to keep pace with growing technology. We must cooperate with the rest of the free world because the future progress of the free world is indivisible. Even if we could prosper in a world where others did not we could not live at peace in that kind of world The people of the United States should ever bear in mind the sobering obligation to live up to the responsibility which our strength imposes The past four decades have been marked by two world-wide wars to resist aggression. In these previous wars many of those now allied with us poured out more blood and more treasure relative to their resources than we did. They emerged from those fearful struggles for survival with economic handicaps which have lasted for a generation and longer. On the other hand the United States because of geographic and other factors did not suffer such destruction At the end of World War II the other free nations set about to repair the ruin they had suffered. The Western European countries mainly through their own efforts but with vital assistance from us made a remarkable recovery. Their industrial production has by now mounted above prewar levels by about percent and their total production by more than percent. On a per capita basis the increase in their total production has been more than percent above prewar levels This increase in production was greatly facilitated by economic aid from the United States. In the three years after our foreign economic aid to Western Europe totaled about billion dollars. Over the same period the total annual output of these aided countries expanded by about billion dollars Even with these increases in production these nations could not notably advance their standards of living. This was because they had to allot so much of their resources to the rebuilding of productive capital equipment. In most instances living standards did not begin to equal or surpass prewar levels until a year before the Korean outbreak. And just when hope was bright the new turn in the international situation required these nations to redivert more of their resources to defense purposes. Our European North Atlantic Treaty partners are doubling their military production in the course of one year and many of them are committed to continuing large increases in the future. Their defense expenditures are CtiARf $ MILITARY EXPENDITURES AS PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT CURRENT PRICES Our European NATO partners like ourselves are devoting an increasing proportion of their production to defense PERCENT PERCENT i * ' ^ V i UNITED TOTAL UNITED STATES EUROPEAN KINGDOM NATO COUNTRIES ^ FRANCE OTHER EUROPEAN NATO COUNTRIES NOTE : MILITARY EXPENDITURES EXCLUDE SOME SECURITY EXPENDITURES AND ARE ON A DISBURSEMENT RATHER THAN A DELIVERY BASIS CALENDAR YEARS USED FOR UNITED STATES FRANCE AND FIVE OTHER COUNTRIES ; FISCAL YEARS USED FOR UNITED KINGDOM AND THREE OTHER COUNTRIES SOURCES : ECONOMIC COOPERATION ADMINISTRATION AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS being raised from less than percent of their combined total output in and about % percent in to about 7l/2 percent in ( See chart ) This is not as large an increase in defense outlays as we are making. But the total economic situation in these other countries is very different from ours. Compared with the period just before World War II the goods and services now available to the people in our country for purposes other than defense have risen about percent per capita in real terms. In contrast with our situation our European North Atlantic Treaty partners now have available goods and services for purposes other than defense less than percent more per capita than in the period just before World War II. This problem is even more clearly revealed by another compari- CHART PER CAPITA GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT AND MILITARY EXPENDITURES PRE-WORLD WAR II AND POST-KOREA 1st HALF OF PRICES Our defense expenditures per capita have increased since before World War IE much more than those of our European NATO partners but our production available for other purposes has risen much more than theirs and is at a much higher per capita level DOLLARS DOLLARS PER CAPITA GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT BOTHER EXPENDITURES FOR X ^ GOODS AND SERVICES OTHER EUROPEAN NATO COUNTRIES NOTE : MILITARY EXPENDITURES EXCLUDE SOME SECURITY EXPENDITURES AND ARE ON A RATHER THAN A DELIVERY BASIS CALENDAR YEARS USED FOR UNITED STATES FRANCE AND FIVE OTHER COUNTRIES ; USED FOR UNITEp KINGDOM AND THREE OTHER COUNTRIES DISBURSEMENT FISCAL YEARS SOURCES : ECONOMIC COOPERATION ADMINISTRATION AND -COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS son. In the United States total output per person even after deducting output for military purposes is estimated at nearly $ for Among our European North Atlantic Treaty partners the figure is estimated at less than one-third as high as ours. Allowing for shortcomings of international income comparisons this difference is striking. ( See chart ) Under these circumstances these countries are obviously limited in the amount of resources they can rapidly divert to defense purposes without undermining their economic and political stability and thus playing into the hands of communist minorities All of these factors have been taken into account in the development of our program to help strengthen the other free nations For this purpose I have recommended appropriations of billion dollars for fiscal Of this amount billion dollars are to provide military assistance to other nations of the free world where increased military strength is needed to combat or forestall communist aggression or subversion. Such assistance will consist primarily of planes tanks guns and other military weapons which must be produced in the United States because they can not be produced abroad within the required time. While the largest portion of this aid will go toward filling the equipment needs of our partners in the North Atlantic Treaty substantial quantities are also destined for countries in the Near East Far East and Latin America The remaining billion dollars would consist of economic aid. Over half of this amount would go to Western Europe in order to create the kind of economic strength which is necessary to support an increased European rearmament effort and to do this without sacrificing the political and social stability required for security over the long run. This assistance will permit the diversion of men materials and facilities from civilian to military production and aid the expansion of total production. Elsewhere in the world where the problem is more economic than military such assistance will help the peoples to combat the poverty disease and illiteracy on which communist subversion thrives. It will contribute moreover to a substantial expansion in the production of basic materials particularly strategic materials which are essential to the economic and military strength of the free world In addition to the materials and equipment provided under the Mutual Security Program we are giving positive assistance where necessary to the export of goods which represent the essential requirements of the other free nations and are paid for by them. And these exports will be considerably larger than non-military supplies which we finance The magnitude of the proposed security program including foreign assistance is well within the capacity of our productive resources. Proposed outlays for assistance to the other free nations over the next year comes to less than percent of our total security program and to only about percent of our estimated total output during this period We can carry forward both the domestic and the foreign aspects of our total security program and still maintain domestic consumption and business investment at high levels The determination of the size and scope of the aid program which we should undertake this year has resulted from the same kind of careful preparation which has gone into the development of our scheduled expansion of United States military forces. It is in fact an integral part of our over-all security program For example the military assistance I have recommended will make possible a rapid build-up in Western Europe of trained forces equipped with modern weapons. The existence of such forces is essential to the security of the United States. The cost to us of supplying equipment through our aid program is only a fraction of the cost of raising a comparable force ourselves The value of our aid programs however is far broader and more significant than simply a good investment in security. These programs will mean that free men in many countries will be able to stand up against the threats the lies the subversion of communist aggression. They will be. able to defend themselves against bullets and they will be able to combat communism 's allies of poverty and hunger and sickness That is why our military and economic aid programs are as essential and as urgent as any part of the work we are doing to build up the defenses of freedom As we move forward with this program we must continuously review and if necessary revise it to assure maximum results. We must be sure in the conduct of this program that other nations do their full share We are challenged by the hard task of a new kind of cooperation based upon a new kind of international situation. We must face these problems of the future realistically and courageously Expanding and Stabilizing the Economy During the past year the growth of production in the American economy has been very large. During the second quarter of our total output was at an annual rate of about billion dollars measured in today 's prices. During the second quarter of measured in the same prices our total output rose to an annual rate of billion dollars or a real gain of billion. This gain far exceeded the increased outlays for national defense. Our economy is stronger now than it was when the defense build-up started This growth in our productive power was not achieved without considerable inflation partly because the measures for controlling inflation took time to enact and get into operation. But since these measures have been in full swing we have continued to expand total output without inflation That is a salient fact about economic developments since the early part of this year We are now in a position where if the Congress enacts adequate legislation we can continue to enlarge our defense efforts to expand our productive capacity and to hold inflation in check. I emphasize that our success in these matters will depend on a series of legislative measures which the Congress is now considering. If the Congress enacts sound and strong legislation as I earnestly hope it will we can achieve our goals II Our production goals The Council of Economic Advisers estimates that we have the ability to increase our total output by at least percent within a year 's time This goal is practicable and we should strive to surpass it. Expansion of output will make it possible to carry forward our security program with less strain upon our economy. It will make it easier to raise necessary tax revenues and to restrain inflation. It will offer the prospect of reducing irksome controls in due course if the international situation does not worsen. Increasing our basic productive capacity will place us in a stronger position to mobilize fully and quickly if that necessity should be forced upon us Manpower is our prime productive resource. Within a year through various programs for the voluntary mobilization of our manpower resources as well as through population growth we should expand our total labor force by ^ to million persons. This expansion is entirely possible and with it there should be no general manpower shortage although there will be shortages in certain skilled trades and in some industries longer hours will be needed A major obstacle to the further expansion of production is the shortage of capacity in a number of key industries. It is not possible to expand capacity in all directions at once. We must concentrate on assuring adequate capacity for military equipment and on basic materials transportation and power. We must postpone those types of investment which add least to our productive strength. We must relate our own expansion of capacity to the capacity available in other countries and to total potential supplies of basic materials A number of basic expansion programs have been prepared by the defense agencies and are now going forward under continuing review. In steel the program calls for an increase of capacity from million ingot tons annually now to nearly million tons by the end of The aluminum program is planned to more than double our rate of output by the end of The proposed electric power program looks toward a percent increase of generating capacity by the end of These are only examples. Large-scale investment in tools and equipment for factory farm and transport must be continued for several years at or near the peak levels which have recently been reached. We must for a time limit investment in non-essentials as we are doing. But we must be very careful in deciding what can be postponed and what can not. The strategy of a prolonged partial mobilization requires a much broader production base than the strategy of total war For example it is now more urgent than before that we begin at once certain developmental projects like the St. Lawrence seaway and power project which will not be completed for several years but which are especially needed in a defense economy. Furthermore we must resume as soon as we can some of the programs which can only temporarily be curtailed without ultimate sacrifice of economic power. For example the expansion of educational and health facilities of long-range resource development and housing as contemplated before the emergency must be resumed in time to avoid serious impairment of our national strength This is why we need a production advance on a very broad front. This means more than the expansion of capacity and the improvement of tools in a few select areas. It means the application of business acumen and labor skills in a joint effort throughout the whole economy. It means the joinder of new science and new technology with the industrial machine It means drawing upon all the resources material and moral which reside within our system of enterprise and government Production aids To encourage the necessary expansion of our productive capacity the Government is allocating scarce materials and extending special aids through direct loans government guarantee of private loans commitments to purchase and rapid amortization of facilities for tax purposes These aids are becoming increasingly effective in connection with specific expansion programs The authority for these production programs with the exception of tax amortization is included in the Defense Production Act. Renewal of this authority is urgently needed in order to achieve our production goals Adequate funds are also required. In addition the defense agencies should be given certain additional production powers such as the authority to construct defense plants where this is essential to the mobilization effort Our stabilization goals After the Korean outbreak a wave of inflation swept over most countries. It was less serious in the United States than in some other places But even here it raised living costs by percent and wholesale prices by percent. This inflation encouraged speculation and put heavy burdens on many of our people. Those fortunate enough to have rising incomes were able to maintain their living standards. But more than half the families of the Nation had no income gains between early and early and almost one-fifth suffered actual declines During the past few months there has been relative price stability Wholesale prices are now somewhat below the peak levels of last March Consumer prices are no longer soaring although they rose slightly from February to May The easing of the inflationary pressure since spring has been due partly to larger civilian supply. It has also reflected higher taxes credit restraints and the application of price and wage controls early this year. Moreover as the military situation improved many consumers switched from frantic buying to cautious buying while businesses felt that some inventories were excessive and curtailed their orders These recent developments have led some people to think that the inflationary trend is ended. This is a dangerous assumption. We can not accept it as a guide to national policy The fundamental fact is that we must increase the annual rate of national security expenditures by about billion dollars during the next year. In order to produce more airplanes tanks and other munitions we must continue the cutbacks which have been made in the production of consumer and investment goods and possibly make some further cuts While total consumer supplies can not be expected to rise significantly incomes will continue to grow because total production and employment will and must continue to expand. It is estimated that by a year from now personal incomes before taxes measured at an annual rate may rise to a level to billion dollars above the current annual rate. If taxes and saving are not sufficiently increased there would thus be a growing disparity between the incomes which people would desire to spend and the supply of consumer goods. This disparity represents the inflationary gap If controls were to be relaxed the inflationary gap would be greater probably very much greater. The price-wage spiral would again be set in motion Inflation stimulates the production of many nonessential goods thus pulling resources away from essential production. It favors some groups at the expense of others. It lifts the cost of national defense and shifts the burden toward those least able to bear it. Inflation impairs the value of peoples ' savings and undermines their willingness to save Winning the battle against inflation is an essential element in our struggle for peace. The battle can not be won by using only one of the weapons available to us. Stabilization depends upon a combination of measures each of which reinforces the others Taxation There is no more important single measure for combatting inflation under present circumstances than the maintenance of a balanced budget The substantial increases in taxes adopted by the Congress since the Korean outbreak have helped to stabilize the economy and aided in halting the price rise. The public approval of these tax increases has demonstrated that the American people are ready to pay the price of protecting our way of life Government expenditures for national security have risen from an annual rate of billion dollars ( in present prices ) before the Korean outbreak to a current rate of about billion dollars. It has been pointed out that the annual rate of these outlays is scheduled to increase by about billion dollars within the next months. This increase even when accompanied by economy in other expenditures is bound to result in growing deficits under present tax legislation To put our security program on a pay-as-we-go basis and to reduce the inflationary pressure which this program will generate we need an increase in taxes of at least billion dollars this year Such an increase in taxes though heavy would not interfere with needed work and production incentives. It would be consistent with maintenance of a good standard of living and an equitable distribution of spendable income. It would aid substantially in the stabilization of prices. It would ease the problems of managing the huge national debt Public expenditures We must also continue to pare down less essential or postponable public spending. This is another avenue toward a balanced budget and toward the control of inflation. The less urgent public activities of Federal State and local governments should be reduced or retarded until the security build-up has passed its peak or until our over-all productive power catches up with the increased burden imposed by the security program In a protracted period of partial mobilization the distinction between defense and non-defense activities is not as clear as in a total war. The strategy of our current defense effort is not to build maximum defensive power at once. It is instead to build reasonable power and to reinforce it with the underlying productive capacity and basic economic strength which will enable us to be ready for any problem of the future. That underlying strength for the long pull includes education and training health services development of natural resources research and scientific progress. We must strike a careful balance not doing as much of all of these things as we ought to do in normal peacetime but not doing so little as to weaken ourselves for the long pull The budget which I have submitted to the Congress for the current fiscal year represents a minimum program consistent with this policy. Further the spending activities of the Government are under continuous review Those which can be reduced without weakening the defense effort are being reduced. Those which can be redirected to make a further contribution to defense are being redirected Credit policy Credit expansion contributed to the inflation of the past year. We must prevent it from adding to future inflationary pressures. In the current national emergency when some types of credit extension are necessary in order to increase production of certain essential defense and civilian requirements while other types of credit extension defeat the purpose of the mobilization program by permitting the expansion of production in unnecessary areas it is essential to use credit controls as selectively as possible General credit measures reach areas not touched by selective credit measures but they do not discriminate between activities which should be supported and those which need to be restrained. For this reason effective measures of selective credit control such as regulation of consumer and real estate credit are needed. The legislative authority to impose them should not be impaired One important merit in the selective credit controls is that they may be loosened or tightened by prompt administrative action in response to shifts in the economic situation. This flexibility would be destroyed if the Congress by excessively detailed legislation were to narrow the range of administrative discretion within which the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System could operate in exercising selective credit controls I recommend that the Congress avoid unwise limitations upon the use of an instrument which has clearly proved its worth I have recommended several times that the Congress authorize the placing of margin requirements on speculative trading in commodity futures. I repeat this recommendation now. Similar provisions for margin requirements in stock trading have proved very useful Authority to impose additional reserve requirements when needed would strengthen the Federal Reserve System 's influence over credit conditions with minimum effects on the needs of debt management. I recommend that the Congress give careful consideration to the plans for accomplishing this purpose outlined in the attached Midyear Economic Review As a phase of the Government 's credit policy all major Federal lending and loan guarantee programs have been revised to minimize their inflationary impact and to contribute most to the defense effort I am also glad to note that lending institutions throughout the country and State and local governments are cooperating in a voluntary credit restraint program which has been initiated by private financial institutions under the sponsorship of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Voluntary saving Voluntary saving is an essential part of a well-rounded anti-inflationary program. Without a large volume of voluntary saving taxes high enough to close the inflationary gap might reduce incentive and cramp production Also without a large volume of voluntary saving only the most severe direct controls could prevent prices from being swept upward by a flood of demand In addition voluntary saving serves other purposes in our economy. It provides a source of funds for investment. It adds to the family 's sense of security for the future. When the time comes to make the transition from a defense economy to a peacetime economy the prudent use of accrued savings will help to maintain demand and employment during the changeover period The Government savings bond program is very important in the effort to promote voluntary saving. The Treasury has carried on an intensified payroll savings drive since shortly after the outbreak of hostilities in Korea Commencing on Labor Day the Treasury will call upon all Americans to do their part in a full-scale savings bond campaign which will reach into every community and every home in the Nation. Because it is a voluntary program this effort must be made in the last analysis not only by the Government but also by every voice that can be heard throughout the country Consideration should be given to developing voluntary savings plans in connection with productivity wage increases. Such plans would help to keep these increases out of the inflationary stream. This would be beneficial to workers who would not be trying to spend their additional income until a time when they could spend it without driving up prices. These plans should be tied in with the Savings Bond Payroll Deduction Program But voluntary saving is not a substitute for adequate taxation or other inflation controls. Nothing could be more destructive of the willingness or ability to save than constantly rising prices. After other inflation controls took hold earlier this year and helped to stabilize prices the rate of voluntary saving moved very sharply upward Price and wage stabilization Indirect measures for controlling inflation are vitally important. But with inflationary pressures as large as those which we may face in the year ahead indirect controls are not enough. They must be buttressed by direct price and wage controls The basic objective of price control now is to hold the general price line. Ceiling prices should not be raised except where essential to provide adequate production incentives to business or to correct clearly inequitable situations. As a general rule price increases should not be approved even where some costs have risen if the industry is earning a fair and equitable level of profits. Just as some upward adjustments of some prices will be needed some rollbacks will be needed in selected cases for example where prices or profits are excessively high. This is the practical way to maintain adequate flexibility in the price structure while holding the general price line. This requires legislation which strengthens not weakens price control Wage stabilization requires a careful balance among three major objectives. First it should seek to prevent an increase in total payrolls so large that after making due allowances for taxes and voluntary saving they would seriously inflate total demand. Second it should provide adequate incentives for increased productive effort and redress serious inequities in the wage structure. And third it should minimize wage increases of a kind which would require price increases The achievement of these objectives is the primary task of the Wage Stabilization Board. In the January Economic Report I expressed hearty agreement with the principle that effective wage stabilization in a democracy requires the active participation and cooperation of management and labor. This is being attained through the present Wage Stabilization Board which contains equal representation of those two groups and of the public. In addition to its stabilization responsibilities the Board is empowered to handle labor disputes affecting the national defense program if parties jointly submit their case for recommendation or decision. The Board is also empowered to recommend a settlement in labor disputes certified by the President as threatening the progress of the national defense program. The labor dispute responsibilities of the Board are the minimum necessary for the mobilization effort Fair and practical wage policies are in process of development. This is not a simple task. The Board has recognized that wages should be adjusted to compensate for changes in the cost of living. Other wage adjustments are also desirable if hardships and inequities are to be dealt with as required by the Defense Production Act. The Wage Stabilization Board has taken steps to deal with the difficult problems of productivity allowances and so-called fringe benefits. Within proper limits productivity allowances provide desirable incentives and can make a real contribution to the mobilization effort while some fringe benefits may be anti-inflationary. These and many other problems must be solved in developing integrated wage policies Rent control The control of rents is important to the success of our mobilization effort As we expand output in different industrial areas we have to attract outside workers who would be repelled if rents were allowed to rise exorbitantly. Simple justice also requires us to protect the families of our soldiers who move to the areas where military camps are being reopened or expanded Despite the great postwar building boom vacancy rates are very low while the expanded mobilization effort is creating new and large demands for housing in many parts of the country. We can not control prices and wages effectively if rents are uncontrolled The rent control law now in effect was designed to permit orderly decontrol of all rents by this time. But it was not enacted in an environment of great defense expansion. That effort is already seriously affecting the housing supply in many areas. The new law that is being considered by the Congress should be geared to the new needs of the defense effort. It should permit effective control of rents where an inflationary rise is threatened which would be harmful to the mobilization effort Summary of Economic Developments in the First Half of In its second half year since the Korean outbreak our economic mobilization for defense made heartening progress. Since the middle of the economy 's over-all output has increased at a faster rate than in any previous postwar period. Price and wage inflation rampant in the first weeks of was checked by the imposition of general price and wage controls at the end of January. Soon thereafter and partly as a result of this action inflationary pressure subsided temporarily as consumers moderated their abnormal rates of buying. Government spending for defense and defense production mounted at an accelerating pace however presaging a revival of inflationary pressures later on. ( See Chart ) Both on the production and the stabilization sides the record leaves room for improvement Employment has increased substantially during the last year with unemployment falling sharply the total labor force growing at about twice the normal rate and our armed forces more than doubling. Nonagricultural employment after expanding rapidly following the Korean outbreak has been relatively stable in while agricultural employment has continued its long-run year-to-year decline. In June total civilian employment was million higher than in June While there is not yet any over-all manpower shortage we do face serious shortages in certain skilled trades and professions some of which have been long-continuing Unemployment in the first months of this year was million lower than in the same period last year. In June it reached the lowest level for any June since World War II million. The average duration of unemployment as well as the number of people out of work has declined Working hours which lengthened considerably during the second half of declined somewhat during the first half of this year. In June the average workweek in manufacturing industries was hours compared with hours in June with all of the increase occurring in durable goods industries Production of goods and services as a whole ( as measured by gross national product in constant prices ) was more than percent higher in the first half of than in the second half of and about percent above the first half of last year Industrial production which soared during the last months of increased from an index figure of in December ( = ) to in April. But since then because of raw materials shortages cutbacks and slackening of civilian demand the over-all index has shown no change Continuing high rates of agricultural production indicate that our supply CHART EGDNOMIC INDICATORS CHXkNGES FROM A YEAR AGO PERCE NTAGE CHANGE PERCENTAGE CHANGE __ EMPLOYMENT p i TOTAL f ; / ; > ; /. : ] CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT f'-'-'-'-'i l&v : ! r.-Vv.vj MRA/NBULE NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT EMPLOYMENT ^ MANU- ^ MANU- MANUFACTURING EMPLOYMENT FACT URINO EMPLOYMENT LiJ ii y- AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT I 1f I I I l | " f l I ' " i UNEMPLOYMENT _ PRODUCTION m \ I if M- GROSS NATIONAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCT PRODUCTION ( 1ST HALF OF PRICES ) ^ ~ " TOTAL HHH PRIVATE /y CONSTRUCTION- ^ PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL " PRODUCERS * ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ PLANT AND EQUIPMENT EXPENDITURES ( NONFARM ) ^ PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION " ~ /x _ INCOME _ NATIONAL INCOME ^ / COMPENSATION OF EMPLOYEES ^ PERSONAL DISPOSABLE INCOME ^ WEEKLY AGRICULTURAL EARNINGS INCOME ^ ( MANUFACTURING ) ^ enr ? ^ occnoc " TAXES ^ PRICES ALL COMMODITIES FARM PRODUCTS FOODS INDUSTRIAL ( OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS ) ALL ITEMS % / FOOD I/ CHA NGES FROM 2ND OTR..TO 2ND QTR. ALL OTHER CHANGES EXCEPT CONSUMERS * PRICES / CHANGE FROM JUNE TO MAY SOURCE : APPENDIX B of foods in the year ahead should be at least as great as in the year just passed and fully adequate for normal requirements. The demand for food however is unusually high. Fortunately current crop prospects are encouraging. Production of cotton will be sharply expanded this year Prices at midyear were far above their levels a year earlier reflecting largely the surge before the General Ceiling Price Regulation was issued at the end of January Wholesale prices stabilized by mid-February and tended down slightly in the second quarter returning by midyear to a level only slightly above that at the time of the General Ceiling Price Regulation. In June farmers were on the average receiving prices equivalent to percent of parity but there were wide differences among commodities. Throughout the second quarter wholesale industrial prices were in a very slow but steady decline and at midyear were at about their January level Consumers ' prices which were climbing about l * /a percent monthly in the buying wave at the turn of the year increased only percent from February to May reaching in the latter month a level of percent above that of June Retail food prices were percent higher than in January. They moved down percent in June but were percent above June last year Wages continued to rise in the first half of but at a diminished rate. Average hourly earnings in manufacturing which had increased over cents an hour from July to December increased by almost cents an hour from January to June of this year. Weekly earnings in durable goods manufacturing advanced almost $ during the first months of but rose only cents for workers in nondurable goods manufacturing during the same period Work stoppages have not been a serious problem so far this year. While the number of stoppages was higher than in the comparable period of total man-days of idleness were at considerably lower levels Profits of corporations before taxes ( not adjusted for changes in inventory valuations ) are estimated to have reached a new record annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of The level estimated for the second quarter of 481/ % billion is below the peak of nearly billion reached in the first quarter. It compares with 37J/2 billion in the second quarter of last year. Corporate profits after taxes reflecting higher tax rates averaged /2 billion for the half year compared with billion in the same period of and a peak rate of nearly billion in the fourth quarter of last year The net income of nonagricultural unincorporated business after dropping off in the fourth quarter of reached a new peak in the first quarter of this year and then declined. The net income of farm proprietors moved steadily upward from mid-1950 to the spring of reaching an estimated annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter of this year. This was billion higher than last year but ^ billion short of the record level in the second quarter of Money and credit developments in the first half of in contrast with the general expansion occurring in the first months after the Korean outbreak were divergent The privately held money supply ( including demand and time deposits ) declined in the first quarter of the year under the usual impact of personal income tax payments and then expanded in the second quarter The total loans of all commercial banks increased about percent or nearly billion dollars between December and June During the same period a year earlier the increase was percent ; in the second'half of it was about percent. Mortgage credit continued to rise in the first half of but at slower rates than in the last half of as credit restrictions took hold. Consumer credit outstanding after soaring billion dollars in the second half of declined about million dollars in the first months of Personal income rose nearly billion dollars ( annual rate ) in the first quarter of and advancing almost billion more in the second quarter reached an annual rate of billion. Despite the tax increase personal income after taxes rose from an annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of to 217/2 billion in the first quarter of and billion in the second quarter Consumption expenditures following roughly the same pattern as in the last months of spurted in the first quarter of to a record annual rate of billion dollars and then declined to an estimated annual rate of billion in the second quarter of this year. In constant prices consumption in the first half of was about percent less than in the second half of last year Net personal saving under the impact of the first quarter buying wave is estimated in that quarter to have amounted to only to percent of disposable income. In the second quarter of saving apparently rose to between and percent of disposable income the highest rate of the postwar period but far below the rates attained during World War II Gross private domestic investment in the first half of this year reached a record level of billion dollars at a seasonally adjusted annual rate percent higher than in the same period last year and percent above the second half of Plant and equipment expenditures reached a new high in the second quarter of nearly one-third above the corresponding quarter of with the increases concentrated in outlays for industrial facilities directly or indirectly serving the security program From the Korean outbreak to May the book value of inventories in manufacturing and trade rose at a record rate. Inventory accumulation slowed in the first quarter of but then in the second quarter rose again as sales failed to meet expectations. In May of this year the ratio of inventories to sales dropped slightly but was close to postwar highs. At the retail level the inventory-sales ratio was considerably above any previous postwar figure While new construction activity was at a record level of about billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) in the first half of the most striking change has been the increasingly sharp fall since February in seasonally adjusted new private housing expenditures as the credit controls have begun to take hold. But private industrial and public construction have far exceeded the levels of a year ago International transactions of the United States in the first half of reflected expansion of United States exports and leveling off in imports as our very heavy post-Korean buying eased somewhat. Our export surplus increased from an annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter of to an estimated billion in the second quarter of this year Largely as a result of increased military aid total net financing of foreign transactions including export of military equipment by the U. S. Government rose from an annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of to billion in the second quarter of With the greater export surplus the outflow of gold and dollar assets from the United States was greatly reduced In Western Europe increasing need for imports raised the trade deficit from an annual rate of billion dollars in the final quarter of last year to more than billion in the first quarter of this year. Price inflation during the first half of became more and more clearly a world-wide problem with most countries suffering greater post-Korean price increases than the United States Government finances in the first months of the year involved a temporary surplus of Federal receipts over expenditures as the growth of defense expenditures lagged for the time being behind the increase in taxes. The budget surplus was billion in the first half of calendar and billion in the fiscal year ended June The Government 's total cash receipts from the public including social security and other transactions as well as those appearing in budget accounts exceeded payments to the public in the first half of by billion dollars or by billion when adjusted for the seasonal peak in receipts in the first quarter Estimates of changes in State and local government finance indicate that in the first half of the small deficit incurred by these governments in the last months of was virtually eliminated HARRY S. TRUMAN JULY The Economic Situation at Midyear A Report to the President By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D. C. July L The PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report The Economic Situation at Midyear in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully Chairman Contents Page REGENT TRENDS AND THEIR SIGNIFICANCE The emergence of a defense economy The general upsurge in demand output and prices The rise in general demand The rise in total output The inflationary rise in prices The fight to curb inflation The lull in inflationary pressures The lull in the growth of industrial output The expansion of defense production The underlying forces at midyear II. THE SHAPING OF THE DEFENSE ECONOMY Main objectives Our economic potential The World War II production achievement The course of production from World War II to Korea Changes in output from mid-1950 to mid-1951 How much can we expand total output ? Major required adjustments in the use of the Nation 's resources Major changes in the use of output to The postwar period to mid-1950 Changes in the composition of the Nation 's output from the first half of to the first half of Prospective changes in government outlays private investment and consumption The current national security program Size of the security program General character of the security program The impact of military production programs on materials The impact of the common security programs on materials The industrial build-up Over-all investment objectives Plant and equipment Priorities in expansion Expansion objectives in specific industries II. THE SHAPING OF THE DEFENSE ECONOMY Continued Impact of the security program on consumption standards The growth of consumption to Consumption in the postwar period Consumption during the period of the new defense build-up III. ECONOMIC POLICIES FOR DEFENSE Prime importance of economic programming The production effort Industrial production aids Defense production aids and regional development. Aids to agricultural production Manpower build-up International production and resources policies The stabilization effort The nature of inflation Appraisal of prospective inflationary pressures The strategy of stabilization Tax policy Curtailment of less essential Federal spending State and local participation in the stabilization program Credit policy Debt management Price policy Subsidies and food prices Wage policy Savings programs The world-wide problem of inflation and stabilization IV. DETAILED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE FIRST HALF OF The expanding economy The labor force Employment Unemployment Production Industrial production Agricultural production Services Prices The inauguration of controls Wholesale prices under controls Consumers ' prices under controls Page IV. DETAILED ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS DURING THE FIRST HALF OF Continued Wages Wage stabilization Work stoppages Profits Money and credit Money supply Credit ' Flow of goods and purchasing power Personal income Personal consumption expenditures Personal saving Business investment and finance Plant and equipment Nonfarm inventories Construction Corporate finance International developments Government fiscal operations Progress of spending for national security program. Cash payments by the Federal Government Cash receipts of the Federal Government State and local government finances The Nation 's Economic Budget Page APPENDIXES A. Statistical Tables Relating to the Nation 's Economic Budget. B. Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power C. Lists of Text Tables and Charts in The Midyear Economic Report of the President and The Economic Situation at Midyear I. Recent Trends and Their Significance THE EMERGENCE OF A DEFENSE ECONOMY T HE invasion of South Korea a year ago decisively altered the course of the United States economy. Until then our major efforts since the end of World War II had been concentrated on expanding civilian production to meet the high postwar level of demand swollen by the shortages built up during the war and on maintaining a high level of employment While furthering this peaceful task at home we had not neglected the economic plight of other free nations. We made a major contribution to the rebuilding of the war-shattered economies of these nations By June the transition from the aftermath of war had been practically completed. In reaching this position the path had not been easy marked as it was by a substantial inflation and many difficult problems of readjustment. But the vigor and resiliency of our economy made it possible to avoid the severe depression which so many had feared. In fact the downturn in was no more than a minor digression from the postwar record of growth. The revival which quickly followed brought the prospect of a period of economic stability with growing levels of civilian production employment and consumption With the Korean outbreak we were confronted with the need to chart a new path for the economy. If we were to avoid a new world war or be ready for one if it came the obligation became clear to build up our defensive strength at a much more rapid rate and help our allies build theirs Only in this way could the free world make plain its resolve to resist aggression. Whether we shall be called upon to fight elsewhere than in Korea depends upon plans of others. But the free world must be prepared. It should not be lulled into complacency by ostensible changes in the strategy of the aggressor nations. Only when it is compellingly clear that aggression is no more to be feared can we afford to relax. We are moving into a position of preparedness which may have to be maintained for years The long ordeal we are embarked upon requires steadiness of nerve and iron patience as much as material build-up in physical strength A basic requirement of national policy in these dangerous years is the firm welding together of the elements of a strong defense economy. With that military power can be successfully organized as the bulwark of national security. Without it military strength would languish for lack of support from its economic roots This is the third semi-annual Review in which the Council of Economic Advisers has faced the unusual problems of a partly mobilized economy A year ago the economic problem implicit in the defense program was already apparent as the response to the Korean aggression began to destroy the economic balance of June Six months ago the country was contending with inflation although defense mobilization was only beginning to have major direct impact on our resources. Most kinds of economic controls existed only in rudimentary form In sharp contrast is the economic situation at midyear ( See chart ) Four major features have marked the course of the economy during the first half of this year : the brief renewal in January of the general upsurge of demand and prices ; the institution of a broad structure of economic controls ; the temporary abatement of inflationary pressures ; and the rapid expansion of primary defense production. The economic prospect is now further affected by the possibility of a quiescent situation in Korea although this does not affect the need for the defense build-up The Council must now examine the trend of the economy and the problems of national economic policy in a setting which is neither that of full mobilization for war nor that of high-level dynamic production and employment in a peaceful world THE GENERAL UPSURGE IN DEMAND, OUTPUT, AND PRICES Before the Korean attack the economy had been rapidly recovering from the recession. The index of industrial production had regained lost ground and risen to the highest point since Wholesale prices had also recovered although for most commodities and especially for farm products and foods they were below peak levels. Unemployment had been reduced by more than million below the peak of January although it was still more than million above the level of June The economic outlook was for further growth in production and a further decline in unemployment The rise in general demand The Korean attack and the response by the United States and the United Nations added to an already highly active economy an unprecedented inci ; ease in private buying. There were two distinct waves of consumer buying reflecting the changing fortunes of war in Korea. By early fall there were signs of some subsidence of the first wave ; but following the Chinese intervention on a massive scale in late November the buying pressure was renewed. The record shows that consumer buying rose to an all-time high in the third quarter of declined slightly in the fourth quarter was renewed with great vigor and reached still another all-time high in the first quarter of and then declined again. ( See appendix table B-4. ) CHART PRODUCTION SPENDING AND PRICES SINCE MID-1950 While production,spending,and prices are now at much higher levels than those of mid-1960,industrial production has been stable since the first quarter. Consumer spending dropped in the second quarter of and wholesale prices eased off slightly from March through June INDEX INDEX PRODUCTION INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION 2nd Qtr. = 3rd Qtr 2nd Qtr th Qtr 1st Qtr 2nd Qtr CONSUMER BUSINESS AND GOVERNMENT SPENDING ^ / 2nd Qtr. = GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE v/ BUSINESS EXPENDITURE / ..tL / ' ' / ' CONSUMER // EXPENDITURE HO 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr 4th Qtr 1st Qtr 2nd Qtr A M J J A J/ INDEX BASED ON GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN 1ST HALF OF PRICES ZJ INDEXES BASED ON EXPENDITURES IN CURRENT PRICES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE B O A R D OF G O V E R N O R S OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS In July the increase in retail buying was percent above that in the preceding month. Retail sales in July and August exceeded the June level by an amount equivalent to 1J4 percent of total sales in This had great effect only because it was superimposed upon a high level of consumer demand. It was followed by some reaction in the autumn in those lines of goods which consumers had stocked beyond their current needs The expansion of private demand for goods came not only from consumers but also from businesses. At first it was not possible for business buying to keep up with consumer buying and inventories declined in July Thereafter business inventories mounted steadily. Business demand was reflected also in the rate of expenditures for new plant and equipment which rose from an annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter of to billion in the fourth quarter and to an estimated billion in the second quarter of ( See appendix tables B-20 and B-21. ) The growth in business demand was undoubtedly stimulated in part by defense contracts actual and anticipated and by expectations of market shortages and direct controls which would restrict the accumulation and use of materials. The increased direct demand by the Government in connection with the defense program was a relatively small part of the total during the first few months following the Korean outbreak. The Federal Government was spending in all less than it had a year before and was running a cash surplus The annual rate of expenditures for security programs rose from billion dollars in the second quarter of to billion dollars in the fourth quarter. These figures however do not fully reflect the impact of defense activity. Expenditures occur in the main after production is completed Production takes time ; and before production can begin plans must be drawn contracts let plants tooled up subcontracting arrangements made material bought and labor hired. Thus much of the effort and resources required for an expanding defense program must be expended many months before they are matched by cash expenditures of the Government Yet the great increase in business spending which extended through the first half of while conditioned by the defense environment was running far ahead of primary defense activity. It reflected a broad and ebullient " boom " psychology an expectation of enlarged market opportunities and higher prices in an economy whose general expansion would be accelerated greatly by international trends The financial environment at midyear and thereafter was very favorable to this rise in private demand because both liquid assets and bank credit were plentiful. Between and the total of currency demand and time deposits and Government securities owned by individ- sj rose about percent whereas as disposable personal income rose only percent during the same period. In liquid assets of corporations were at the highest level in history. The increased demand was financed in part by drawing on liquid assets in part by borrowing and in part by the increases in income which were the inevitable outgrowth of the larger physical volume of production and the higher prices. ( See appendix tables B-30,B-31 andB-39. ) In addition consumer borrowing rose at a record rate until Regulation W was re-established in the fall. This action discouraged further expansion of instalment credit and reduced the amount of credit involved in those instalment sales which were made. Business also borrowed heavily Total business loans of all commercial banks rose billion dollars or percent between June and December and expanded billion dollars or percent during the first quarter of Some of the rise in business loans during the second half of was seasonal but the rise in early came at a season when loans usually decline The uptrend in private demand was also supported by increased incomes The growth of personal income during the second half of was phenomenal. Contrasting the second and third quarters the rise amounted to about percent. Contrasting the third and fourth quarters there was a further increase of percent. The first quarter of brought an additional increase of about percent followed by an additional percent in the second quarter. ( See appendix table B-7. ) The general upsurge in the desire to buy backed by the funds to do so was responsive to the expansionary environment which existed at midyear and was greatly augmented by international developments. The impelling reason for the spurts in buying during the third quarter of and the first quarter of was the expectation of shortages and price increases. Consumers projected into the future the vivid memories of lack of goods during and immediately after World War II. Businessmen foresaw glowing profit opportunities in brisk markets and rising prices In the intense reaction after the first Korean aggression and again after the Chinese onslaught consumers and businesses alike tried by prompt private stockpiling to protect themselves against the possibility of empty shelves rationing quality deterioration and rising prices. Fear of being thwarted by the competing demands of others intensified the buying waves The ensuing inflation in prices led to anticipation of further price increases and accelerated the buying rush to beat the rise While these spurts have an important bearing upon the current outlook they are not more significant for the long run than the more permanent trend reflecting more basic factors The rise in total output Immediately after the Korean outbreak it became clear that one of our most important economic tasks was to expand production of essential goods. The President 's Midyear Economic Report in July opened with these words : " Recent international events make it more important now than ever before that we maintain and expand our strength on the home front. For the sinews of all our strength everywhere in the world are found in what we achieve here at home. We must make full use of our great productive resources our ever-improving industrial and scientific techniques and our growing labor force. We must redirect a part of these resources to the task of resisting aggression. " Viewing the past months as a whole the upsurge of demand has been accompanied by a remarkable further increase in total production from the high levels already existing in June The output of goods and services in real terms i. e. after full allowance for price changes increased by about percent comparing the second quarter of with the second quarter of ( See chart and appendix table B-3. ) This meant the highest peacetime level ever recorded and exceeded the peak year of World War II. It has been a major accomplishment of American enterprise during the past year to meet the requirements of a growing defense production to invest at record rates in inventories and in new plant and equipment and at the same time to furnish the highest level of consumption in history By far the largest part of the growth in output took place during the first months after the Korean aggression. The advance was spectacular. The index rose from a level of ( = ) in June to in December a rise of more than percent with a further jump to in January Total real output however rose by only about ^ percent comparing the second quarter of with the fourth quarter Since initially the volume of total production grew more rapidly than the volume of defense production civilian production was also increasing New peaks were reached in the production of automobiles washing machines vacuum cleaners and other consumer durable goods. The rate of gross private domestic investment also continued to reach new peaks ; a substantial part of this was undoubtedly in preparation for defense production The unusual record of growth from June through January was sparked mainly by the increase in demand on the part of both consumers and business which has already been reviewed. The expansion in output was accomplished in part by increased employment and longer hours of work and in part by greater productivity. Nonagricultural employment rose percent comparing the first half of with the second half. Average hours worked per week in manufacturing rose from in June to in December. Increased productivity has partly resulted from programs for modernizing and expanding productive facilities which have been carried on since the end of World War II Industrial production expanded not only in the United States but also in other countries. This expansion has contributed to the current shortage of raw materials. Output in other countries has been rising since World War II. New impetus was given by the rapid expansion of demand in the United States after Korea and the consequent sharp increase in American imports. World industrial production outside the United States and the Soviet Union which had been rising prior to the outbreak of hostilities in Korea has since risen somewhat more rapidly exceeding the corresponding level of the year before by percent. Production in Western Europe averaged still higher during the first part of In parts of Western Europe and even more in Japan manpower and plant are available or could be provided to permit further gains. A limiting factor is raw materials. Although material supplies appear to be sufficient to permit production at current or slightly increased rates a substantial further growth of output in Western Europe is being hampered by shortages of coal sulphur wool high grade iron ore steel scrap and nonferrous metals. This results somewhat from the fact that in when the United States was building up inventories some countries of Western Europe were running down their inventories of many important raw materials. But primarily it reflects the failure of raw material producing capacity to grow sufficiently to meet the needs of the United States and other industrial countries when their economies are all operating at high levels at the same time The inflationary rise in prices Prices which had risen moderately during the first half of began to climb rapidly with the expansion of business and consumer demand after the North Korean attack. The sharpest of the early advances occurred in markets for raw materials which responded quickly to the flood of buying orders. Food prices both wholesale and retail reacted less violently but moved up rapidly and substantially. Prices of industrial products went up somewhat more slowly in the early weeks following the Korean outbreak but had risen by about the same percentage as food by February when wholesale prices leveled off. The rise in consumers ' prices which had begun in March was accelerated after Korea and lagging as usual behind wholesale prices continued somewhat after the latter had stabilized. ( See appendix tables B-24 and B-25. ) The timing of price increases reflected the two great spurts in consumer buying. There were sharp increases during the summer of then a short period of relative stability during which some prices at wholesale declined followed by a sharp upward movement between November and February. During January the price advance was rapidly accelerating prompting issuance of the General Ceiling Price Regulation late that month. Wholesale prices continued to rise for a few weeks but later declined somewhat varying within a narrow range from the middle of February through the balance of the half year The spread of price increases throughout the economy was primarily due to very strong demand but was also an adjustment of sales prices to rising costs the imitative reaction of businessmen to other price increases and an effort to anticipate and be in readiness for the later imposition of price ceilings. Most manufacturers and merchants had an active sellers ' market which gave promise of long duration. Believing that the increases in their costs would not be temporary they quickly brought prices into line with costs. Expectations of direct control of prices encouraged this speedy adjustment. Many firms raised their prices in anticipation of the cost increases without waiting for them A price increase for one commodity brought higher prices for other commodities with spiraling effect. Moreover as the prices of consumers ' goods rose and demand for workers increased widespread upward wage adjustments followed. The number and speed of these reflected the number and strength of organized workers and the presence of costof-living escalator clauses in many wage contracts. Business concerns were in a financial position to grant large wage increases and employers wanted to lift their wage rates to a level favorable to the recruitment of workers before controls took effect. The higher production costs which resulted from higher material prices and wage increases led to still higher sales prices and thereby entered into the spiral The inflationary price pressures were not limited to the United States The response of the free world to the Korean development created upward pressures upon prices in many countries. Particularly there was increased demand for such materials as rubber wool tin and woodpulp. The influence of developments in the United States was augmented by the actual and anticipated acceleration of defense expansion in Western Europe and some other countries The result has been to generate an inflation of worldwide scope. Although the slackening in price rises here has been followed by some recent slackening abroad the rise of prices has gone to far greater lengths in most other countries than it has in the United States. Contrasted with the percent increase in our wholesale prices since the outbreak of Korean hostilities nearly half the countries in Western Europe have suffered increases in wholesale prices exceeding percent since June of last year. In the case of Japan where there are special factors associated with its role as a staging area for the Korean campaign the increase through April exceeded percent. The enormous price increases which have occurred constitute in some countries a danger to political and social stability and to the security program of the free world 4o THE FIGHT To CURB INFLATION The inflationary danger was recognized by the public and the Government immediately after the Korean outbreak and a number of steps were taken to meet it. The Defense Production Act was passed. Priorities and export controls were placed on the flow of scarce materials essential to defense production. Measures to reduce civilian demand were designed. The public was repeatedly informed that there was a plentiful supply of most goods and was urged not to buy more than necessary. All Federal Government programs were reviewed aiming at the curtailment as far as possible of nondefense spending. A tax-reducing and adjusting measure was turned into a major tax-increasing measure an unprecedented achievement made possible by the close cooperation of all concerned. Later the excess profits tax was passed. Selective credit controls were imposed on the purchases of new houses and consumer durable goods and some general measures of credit restraint were adopted to make credit less available for nonessential purposes. Actions were also taken to achieve maximum expansion of domestic agricultural production " Indirect " measures are essential to counteract an excess of demand over supply and are therefore fundamental. But to deal with waves of mass buying financed by accumulated liquid savings more direct and drastic measures are also at times required such as price and wage controls. The legal powers to impose such controls were enacted in September By then the situation in Korea seemed more favorable the wave of consumer buying was dying down and prices were leveling off. But the new wave of mass buying which followed the entrance of the Chinese into the conflict again altered the outlook. On December in declaring a national emergency the President announced the determination to impose mandatory price and wage controls During December and January administrative preparations were made for this step. As a stopgap the Government called for voluntary restraint and promulgated in December a set of voluntary pricing standards. These measures undoubtedly had some usefulness but public belief that mandatory controls were soon going to be applied probably accelerated the upward price and wage movement. Confronted with this critical situation and despite the lack of an adequate administrative staff the Office of Price Stabilization late in January issued the General Ceiling Price Regulation In effect this froze most prices at the highest levels at which deliveries had been made during the period from December through January At the same time a parallel order was issued freezing all wages and salaries New and stronger measures of credit restraint were also brought to bear Member bank reserve requirements were increased further attempts were made to limit the amount of funds available for lending through a new policy on open-market operations regulations applying to loans for new construction were broadened margin regulations on stock exchange loans were tightened and the major classes of lending institutions were brought into a voluntary program to limit lending for purposes not related to mobilization objectives Meanwhile the tremendous increase in general output reviewed above was building a curb against inflation from the supply side. These productive achievements tended to be overlooked in the general public concern with military difficulties on the battlefield and the evidence of inflation on the homefront THE LULL IN INFLATIONARY PRESSURES A feature of the first year of the security effort was that just when defense production began really to expand a lull in inflationary pressures developed Beginning about mid-February buying slowed down and prices showed signs of stabilizing. Real consumption expenditures ( first half prices ) declined from an annual rate of billion dollars in the first quarter of to billion in the second quarter. In the second quarter there was a softening of some markets and many prices eased off from their peaks Paradoxical as this slowing down may appear at first glance it should not have been surprising. The strong sometimes even violent spurts in buying during July and August and again early in had important emotional elements the fear of early shortages and of rising prices. There was some factual basis for this reaction in that a greatly expanded security program must add substantially to demand and lead to a shift of resources from civilian to defense purposes. But general public expectations of the timing and degree of impact of the program proved to be incorrect. The rush to buy on the part of consumers and business created the very situation which had been feared. Prices did surge upward and temporary shortages began to appear thus accentuating the rush to buy Two factors deprived this phase of the inflationary movement of its momentum In the first place the general freeze of prices late in January allayed the fear of rising prices. Suddenly there was no need to buy to beat the price rise. With this pressure removed other stabilization measures also began to exert continually increasing restraint Second the fear of early shortages was reduced by several developments There had been a large increase in the output of civilian goods since the Korean outbreak. The effect of this growing supply was temporarily obscured by the continuing rise in prices and by fear that the war in Korea might spread to a wider area. As the military situation improved and stabilized and as prices were brought under control consumers realized that the fear of immediate shortages had been exaggerated. Moreover by this time consumers had greatly increased their stocks of durable goods and many of them had spent a substantial part of their accumulated savings or had gone into debt. In this situation consumer buying began to slacken Since civilian production during the first quarter of continued at or close to the peak rates achieved in the result was a continued high rate of inventory accumulation particularly at the retail level and especially of consumer durable goods. Retailers who since Korea had placed larger orders than normal to be sure of receiving an adequate supply found themselves with a flood of deliveries. These caused no difficulties so long as consumers continued to expand their purchases. But with the decline in retail sales after mid-February retailers became concerned. This was enhanced by the failure of Easter sales to meet expectations. As a result of slower sales and quicker deliveries a substantial volume of involuntary inventory accumulation took place. During the second quarter retailers cut new orders sharply and attempted to reduce inventories through aggressive sales promotion. Particularly noteworthy was the temporary war on privately-price-fixed items in New York and several other cities The chief effect of the lull has been a softening in some prices and a leveling off in some important business activity. Wholesale prices which had risen sharply to an all-time peak of ( = ) in March leveled off and were down to in June. A somewhat sharper drop was experienced by prices of farm products and by prices of some industrial commodities especially some textiles and some chemicals. Wholesale food prices were down less than percent from their peak. The most pronounced drop was in the prices of basic commodities which had begun to weaken in mid-February and fell by about percent by the end of June. The cost of living however was about percent higher in May than in February Just as the immediacy of the impact of the security program was exaggerated there is now the danger that the significance of the present lull may be similarly overestimated. To the extent that the lull has restored buying to more normal proportions its effect is all to the good. But to the extent that it leads to a state of complacency about the future risk of inflation its effect is harmful. The current period of hesitation must be seen in the perspective of the basic longer-range factors affecting demand THE LULL IN THE GROWTH OF INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT The lull in inflationary pressure has been accompanied by a slowing down in the rate of growth of industrial production. The gross national product in real terms has expanded about percent from the fourth quarter of to the second quarter of while the Federal Reserve Board index of industrial production rose from an average of to an average of an increase of percent. ( See appendix tables B-3 and B-17. ) Although the index has not increased in recent months indus- trial production has been running at very high levels. Consumption expenditures however declined about billion dollars ( annual rate ) from the first quarter to the second quarter of this year. Associated with this decline in consumption expenditures has been an offsetting increase in the accumulation of inventories amounting to about billion dollars ( annual rate ) during the same period The slackening in the vigor of industrial expansion during the past months has been due to three sets of causes : first some industries had reached capacity ; second some industries were forced to reduce output because of limitations on the nondefense use of metals or other raw materials ; and third some industries faced a drop in demand Steel is one of the industries in which output has been limited by existing plant capacity. Steel capacity is being increased but the expansion necessarily will be slow At present about percent of the gross national product is going into new nonfarm plant and equipment so that industrial capacity is rising significantly. Expansion programs in bottleneck areas such as steel aluminum power and transportation equipment are particularly effective in raising our productive potential The main raw materials bottlenecks have been metals including steel copper lead zinc aluminum and tin. It has been necessary to restrict the use of these materials. Such restrictions account ^ in part for recent decreases in the output of automobiles washing machines refrigerators and other durable goods However some industries have been operating at less than capacity levels because of the market situation. Large inventories and in some cases reduced demand appear to explain recent drops in output in a number of industries notably textiles shoes and liquor THE EXPANSION OF DEFENSE PRODUCTION Primary defense production which started slowly following the Korean outbreak has been picking up speed and is now rapidly moving ahead The increase in defense production involves conversion of many facilities being used in other ways. In addition it requires substantial industrial expansion. The Government has employed a number of incentives for encouraging expansion in the desired industries. Accelerated tax amortization reduces some of the risks of investment. Defense loans are available where financing is needed. Long-term purchase contracts and standby purchase agreements help give assurance that the plant will have a market In the second half of there were large increases in the output of many goods and services which are necessary in a defense economy. The index of machinery production increased from in June to in December ( = ) Chemical products jumped from in June to by the end of the year There was little increase in deliveries to the Government of finished defense products during the second half of In the first months of however deliveries of military goods and military construction have increased rapidly and have now reached a level of billion dollars a month which is more than three times the monthly rate before the Korean outbreak. Large further increases are ahead. The Second Quarterly Report of the Director of Defense Mobilization indicates that the delivery rate is scheduled to rise to billion dollars a month within a year The total security program took percent of the gross national product in the second quarter of percent in the fourth quarter of and percent in the second quarter of According to the present schedule it will increase further to about percent in the last quarter of ( See chart ) We have greatly enlarged the production of aircraft and combat vehicles electronic equipment and other military goods. Defense production of all kinds will mount rapidly in the future. It takes time to work out specifications draw up contracts and subcontracts and get production lines organized. Much of the tooling up and other preliminaries has now been accomplished THE UNDERLYING FORGES AT MIDYEAR As the Council seeks to appraise the economic outlook at midyear the most important factors to be considered are the prospective levels and CHART THE EXPANDING SECURITY PROGRAM the security programs represented percent of our national output in the second quarter of this year. A year from now they will take nearly percent according to schedule -SECURITY EXPENDITURES ( PERCENT OF GNP ) 2nd Qtr I960 2nd Qtr NOTE : BASED ON DATA ADJUSfEO TO 1ST HALF PRICES SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS 2nd Qtr trends in the security program in business investment and in consumer demand. The relationship between the total of these forms of demand and the available supplies of goods will mainly determine the nature and intensity of the stabilization problem to be met Powerful international tensions continue to dominate domestic economic developments. The President and the governmental agencies charged with responsibility for national security have made clear that the security program should continue as planned regardless of the outcome of negotiations in Korea. The reason compelling this conclusion is clear To stop the aggression of the Soviet Bloc in Korea is not to prevent aggression elsewhere. Since the Soviet aggressors have sought to create political and economic instability in nearly all non-Soviet countries. When conditions seemed right the aggressors have used military threats and actions. Such tactics have been particularly successful in China but were resisted in Iran Greece Turkey Berlin Indo-China and Korea. If we falter or relax in our security build-up it is reasonable to expect that this would prompt a renewal of pressures at other points. Only through strength can we succeed in proving that aggression does not pay The rate of defense production is rapidly increasing. During the second quarter of the output for security reached an annual rate of over billion dollars. Under present schedules we are to achieve an annual rate of almost billion dollars a year hence. It is manifestly impossible to accomplish such an enlargement of the security program without placing strains upon many parts of the economy. Our total output can not be increased as rapidly during the next year as the security program. In the case of many vital commodities the increased security requirements will greatly reduce the amounts available for other purposes A large increase in defense spending to the extent that it is not offset by reduced spending in the private sector of the economy will greatly increase the incomes of consumers and businessmen. With increasing defense expenditures the Council would expect the number of people gainfully employed to rise hours of work and overtime payments to increase and wage rates to creep upward even under an effective wage stabilization program A rising level of defense production and consumer spending stimulates business demand for plant and equipment which has been running at alltime peak rates. In fact the most recent declarations and surveys of business intent reveal that affirmative policies must continue to be used to bring the total of private investment downward toward a less inflationary level. By weeding out nonessential investment this can be done without impairing the high level of investment in plant and equipment required to keep our economy strong enough to support the defense burden Thus with these fundamental forces at work strong restraint on both business investment and consumer spending is required if a new inflationary movement is to be avoided There are to be sure. some substantial uncertainties in the picture Many people have interpreted the opening of negotiations for a cease-fire in Korea as evidence of a fundamental change in the economic outlook This would be a correct interpretation only if the schedules for our basic defense build-up were to be substantially altered and this is not the intent of national policy. Nonetheless the cessation of hostilities in Korea could have important intermediate effects upon the climate of public sentiment which conditions the economy There might for example be important effects on consumer spending which does not always follow a predictable pattern particularly in the short run. Durable and semi-durable consumers ' goods were purchased at an exceptionally high rate for a good many months in the second half of and early in The immediate necessity for consumers to buy such goods has accordingly been somewhat reduced. Although personal disposable income rose by more than billion dollars ( annual rate ) from the first to the second quarter personal consumption expenditures dropped by more than billion resulting in an increase of over billion in personal saving. At the same time there was an increase of billion dollars ( annual rate ) in inventories probably much of it involuntary. No one can forecast precisely how long the lull in consumer expenditures may continue If consumers should interpret the international developments to mean that there will be plenty of goods at lower prices there might for a time be a substantial decline in purchases despite rising personal income. It does not seem probable however that this would continue for long even in the absence of any new alarming international developments which might start a new spurt in buying. The pressures to buy the necessities and comforts of everyday living are very strong in the case of most families In the longer run changes in prospective incomes are as good a measure as there is available of changes in prospective spending. In the second half of disposable personal income was at an annual rate about billion dollars higher than in the first half of that year. In the first half of it was at an annual rate billion dollars higher than in the second half of In the second half of this year and on into next year this growth is likely to be very substantial Businessmen likewise are in a position to decide whether to continue with their plans for a very high level of business investment. They could if they chose substantially reduce their plans even below the point where restrictions would have to be placed upon them. This is certainly a possibility to be reckoned with but we believe that on balance it is not likely to occur. The interests of business lie in maintaining a high level of investment to meet both the demands of the defense program and of the civilian economy. Even in the ultimate event of a general and more permanent improvement of international relations the basic expansion programs which have been outlined by those in charge of the mobilization effort would not result in any general overexpansion of facilities. There is hardly any important expansion program for basic industrial commodities which exceeds the sound needs of an expanding peacetime economy. If it should become possible at some later time to reduce our defense goals the expanding output of steel and other commodities could find ample markets in the unsatisfied needs of our own people and in the expansion of world trade The high level of saving which will be generated by an effective stabilization program and the opportunity of reducing the very high level of taxation if and when defense needs dwindle will help support markets during such a transition period Businessmen also recognize that they have a large responsibility to conform their investment plans to the level and composition which will fulfill the strategy of the defense program. This responsibility is particularly heavy because private expansion is now being relied upon much more heavily and public investment in plant much less heavily than during World War II. To falter in this responsibility would jeopardize national security in the event of a more critical situation later The analysis we are advancing may be stated in this form : First there is nothing in the international situation to justify a basic alteration of course and the build-up of the security program will be continued. Second while carrying out the security program will require that total business investment be cut substantially below the all-time peak rate of recent months nonetheless such investment must be encouraged to remain at levels which will still be very high by past standards. Otherwise we could not build the necessary industrial complement to our growing military strength And third the pursuit of these needed military and industrial objectives will in itself augment consumer incomes which already are high enough to be potentially inflationary even though there has been some lull in buying during recent months Although the Council recognizes the existence of some uncertainty in the immediate economic outlook even with the continuation of the security program as planned the uncertainty is mostly a question of short-range timing. The precise length and depth of the lull are difficult to forecast and we do not attempt to do so. It seems highly probable that the underlying inflationary pressure developing from the defense program will expand to serious proportions as production under that program increases With civilian incomes in the aggregate likely to rise much more rapidly than civilian production the basic forces are inflationary even though the current erratic buying on the part of consumers or businesses may prevent these underlying forces from manifesting themselves in any particular month or even for a few months. Over a longer period which is of greater significance for national policy civilian incomes rising faster than civilian production will generate inflation unless there is an effective containment program For such a program we can not rely mainly upon the further increases in the rate of voluntary saving which would be required to do the job alone. The rate of saving has already increased greatly in recent months and this increase itself has been in large part the reaction of the public to the fact that other anti-inflationary measures were initiated and have been taking hold In any event the implications for policy are clear. The only safe course is to be continually prepared to meet expanded inflationary pressures to the extent they arise. An ineffectual program by removing assurances against new breaches in the price line would bring danger of repetition of past spurts in consumers ' buying and resultant inflationary pressures even beyond expectations based on rising levels of incomes. It takes time to put measures into operation and to make them effective. For example those who say that price and wage controls were established too slowly should be the last to reduce the power to impose those controls ; it takes time to build up administrative organizations capable of effectively applying controls. All our equipment should be in good order to fight the fires of inflation. When they are burning vigorously it is too late to start getting ready. It would be a most unwise gamble now to deprive the economy of reinforcements against inflation In the following sections of this Review we undertake to fill in these general conclusions with more specific details both as to the shape of the economic outlook and as to necessary measures II. The Shaping of the Defense Economy MAIN OBJECTIVES T the present time our principal task is to make ourselves more secure and help to make the rest of the free world more secure. This involves a two-fold economic objective. First we must speedily build up and equip armed strength. This includes as a current objective maintaining our own armed forces at million military personnel producing the increased quantities of armaments and military equipment needed for our expanded forces and helping other free nations to build up their military strength. The second and equally important part of our two-fold task is to keep our economy strong by assuring an adequate flow of civilian goods and to make it stronger for the great challenge now confronting us and the even greater challenge which could arise by expanding our total output and by adding even more to our productive capacity or industrial potential. In addition we need to help other free nations in further developing their economic strength Each element in this effort is a necessary part of the whole program. By rebuilding our military power we hope to deter aggression and prevent a major war. Since it would be imprudent to dismiss the possibility that actions of hostile powers might bring about such a conflict it is necessary to lay the foundation for the rapid achievement of full mobilization should that become necessary. Helping other free nations build up their military and economic strength is also vital because our security is bound up with the rest of the free world just as its security is bound up with ours. This interdependence takes many forms military economic political and psychological. On the economic side we are to a growing extent dependent on foreign countries for a large fraction of our supplies of certain important raw materials while the industrial capacity of other countries is a vital element in the common capacity to produce military goods The economic significance of these security objectives in present planning is highlighted by the fact that the national security programs are scheduled to rise from an annual rate of about billion dollars in the second quarter of to nearly billion dollars in the corresponding period of next year It should be observed that this is not in the Council 's judgment a maximum program. To be sure the maximum practicable size of a A defense program can not be determined completely by the primary purpose of achieving national security ; it is necessarily limited by the size and strength of the economy by the willingness of the people to incur sacrifices and by the prospective duration of the emergency. In a short intensive effort the expansion and even the replacement of industrial equipment can be omitted but if this were done in a long-continued effort the productive machine would break down In this Review however the Council is not concerned with what could be the maximum size of a security program. We are confident that the program which has been adopted is readily sustainable as will clearly appear in the pages which follow. The practical problem now confronting the country is what implications this defense program has for the Nation and what steps need to be taken to achieve the defense program while at the same time maintaining the strongest possible civilian economy To promote a strong civilian economy while at the same time building up our defenses requires both the expansion of productive power and the maintenance of economic stability. These objectives are often mutually supporting. For example increasing production by increasing the number of people at work and the hours worked makes it possible to meet the needs of the defense program with more goods remaining for civilian use However increases in production through expanding industrial plant and equipment require the use of labor materials and existing plant which otherwise would be largely available to make goods directly for consumers Rapid industrial build-up is thus likely to make the task of maintaining economic stability immediately more difficult. But for the future it makes that task easier particularly if it results in greater productivity and the removal of production bottlenecks In determining the rate of industrial build-up to be encouraged it is thus necessary to consider the feasibility of holding down or reducing consumer spending. Moreover we must constantly appraise the use of resources and take appropriate action to effect the necessary changes Decisions concerning resource use made on a piecemeal basis are likely either to overshoot or undershoot feasible goals and to cause great waste and loss of strength by unsound allocation of resources. Only by comprehensive programming of requirements and supplies is it possible to arrive at a rational balance among objectives to determine whether in total they are feasible and to shape carefully the individual components of our composite of military and economic strength OUR ECONOMIC POTENTIAL To sustain a large defense effort we must accelerate the expansion of our total output and we must expand a few specific types of capacity to levels even beyond those likely to be used in the short run except in case of war. A large increase in the output of basic industrial and agricultural CHART GROWTH IN PRODUCTION The total production of goods and services in was about percent higher than in The increase was much greater in industrial production which rose percent,and especially in the durable goods industries ) where output in was more than percent above the level INDEX IST40 IOO I N D E X ~ ~ TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND SERVICES- ^ I N D E X = 3CXO INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION COMPONENTS ^ S S- TOTAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION DURABLE MANUFACTURING NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING * * * NJJEX BASED ON GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN 1ST HALF OF PRICES SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS commodities both here and abroad will make it possible to maintain a large security program with a progressively lighter strain upon our economy and on that of the free world generally. It would also permit within several years provided that the international situation does not worsen the resumption of improvement in living standards in the United States and elsewhere in the free world. On the other hand if output in the United States were to increase no faster than the 2l/z percent average annual increment which was achieved between and the Korean outbreak the impact of the defense program would be prolonged. By increasing our capacity to produce military items and certain key materials even more rapidly than we increase actual output we can have a large reservoir of power to draw upon quickly if critical events should require fuller mobilization Both the World War II experience and the postwar experience have direct bearing on what we are able to do and how we can best proceed to do it The World War II production achievement From to the total national output ( measured in real terms ) increased about percent industrial production by nearly percent and the production of durable goods including military goods by more than percent. ( See chart ) While these figures need to be qualified because of the many difficulties of measuring wartime production nonetheless the achievement exceeded all expectations. ( See also appendix tables B-2 B-16 and B-17. ) A major factor in this growth was the much fuller utilization of our manpower resources. Between and the total labor force rose from million to million and the proportion of the population of working age in the labor force rose from percent to percent. ( See chart ) Civilian employment rose by 6J ^ millions while the armed forces were increased by almost million ; of this 175/2 million increase percent reflected growth in the labor force and percent reflected a reduction in unemployment from about million to less than million. During the same period the workweek for factory workers was lengthened from about hours to about providing the equivalent of about 2l/z million additional production workers. ( See chart and appendix table B-13. ) Although increases in labor productivity can be measured only roughly output per man-hour is estimated to have increased about twice as fast between and as it did on the average over the previous decades. This was partly a byproduct of bringing resources into intensive use and partly a result of the changing composition of the national output The wartime production achievement also required a large expansion of productive capacity. From through total manufacturing capacity increased by approximately percent. ( See chart page ) The capacity increase in machinery producing industries was about CHART EXPANSION OF THE LABOR FORCE An increase in the labor force of million and a reduction in unemployment of over million made it possible to increase the armed forces by almost II million and also increase nonagricultural employment by million contrasting with MILLIONS OF PERSONS * LABOR FORCE MILLIONS OF PERSONS * TOTAL -UNEMPLOYMENT -ARMED FORCES AGRICULTURAL " EMPLOYMENT NONAGRICULTURAL ^ EMPLOYMENT PERCENT PERCENT PARTICIPATION ! RATE ( TOTAL LABOR FORCE AS PERCENT OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION * ) * I4 Y E A R S OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE CHART INCREASES IN LABOR INPUT AND OUTPUT The major factor in our wartime productive achievement was the intensive utilization of our manpower resources INDEX,1940 * I T EMPLOYMENT INCLUDING ARMED FORCES : gx : : gSg : : S ^ HOURS WORKED PER WEEK PRODUCTIVITY ( GNP PER MAN-HOUR ) * t : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : X : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : l TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND SERVICES * X | * INDEX SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS percent in chemicals about percent. and in electric power somewhat more than percent Except in periods of full mobilization of resources such as was reached during the latter part of World War II the limits on the expansion of output are in practice seldom if ever reached. Within a surprisingly short time seemingly impossible materials and facilities problems can be overcome. This was demonstrated not only by our own wartime experience but by Britain 's and Germany 's as well The course of production from World War II to Korea From the peak to the total national output in real terms dropped about percent and the index of industrial production fell nearly percent. A large part of this decline reflected the change-over to peacetime products. At the same time there was a shortening of the average workweek in all branches of employment by about percent and in manufacturing industries by more than percent. Despite a large contraction in the total labor force the return of military personnel to civilian life increased civilian employment CHART CHANGES IN LABOR INPUT AND OUTPUT The rise in output during the period from to the first half of mainly reflected the gain in labor productivity. Since mid-1950 employment has risen substantially and productivity has continued to increase gradually INDEX O EMPLOYMENT INCLUDING ARMED FORCES I960 1st Half 1st Half HOURS WORKED PER WEEK I960 1st Half 1st Half PRODUCTIVITY ( GNP PER MAN-HOUR ) * 1st Half 1st Half TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND SERVICES ' 1st Half 1st Half * INDEX BASED ON GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN 1ST HALF OF PRICES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS From to the first half of the gross national product ( measured in terms of first half of prices ) rose from an annual rate of billion dollars to billion an increase of nearly percent while industrial production increased percent. The rise in output occurred mainly from to This postwar rise in output was the result of increases in productivity since the increase in total employment was offset by the further shortening of the average workweek. ( See appendix table B-ll. ) Output per man-hour appears to have risen about to 2/2 percent a year a somewhat larger rate of increase than had occurred during earlier periods of peacetime prosperity. ( See chart ) The equipping of workers with better productive facilities was mainly responsible for this gain in productivity. During the period manufacturing capacity appears to have been increased a little more than percent a year on the average Electric power capacity rose somewhat faster and much larger increases CHART CHANGES IN PRODUCTION Compared with the first half of last year all major sectors of production are much higher. Production in the durable manufacturing goods industries in the first half of averaged percent higher than in the first half of and percent higher than in INDEX I946el00 INDEX = | TOTAL PRODUCTION IDF GOODS AND SERVICES J/ / I N D E X = INDEX = INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION COMPONENTS no 1st Half \ J BASED ON GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN 1ST HALF OF PRICES ZJ BASED ON ANNUAL DATA SOURCES ' BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S took place in the chemical oil machinery and automobile industries. ( See chart page ) Despite these large increases however throughout most of the period a shortage of capacity restricted the growth of many types of output We thus found ourselves in mid-1950 with a productive plant so far superior to what we had at the peak of World War II that we were clearly in a position to exceed by far the production record if we moved toward fuller utilization of our manpower and material resources Changes in output from mid-1950 to mid-1951 The decision last summer to undertake a greatly enlarged security program made it again necessary to step up the expansion of national production and productive capacity. Although we were at that time well on our way toward full employment there was a remarkable expansion of output in the ensuing year. Short-term changes in total output can not be precisely measured but it appears that the total national product as well as industrial production increased considerably more in the months following the Korean outbreak than they had in the entire period from through the first half of ( See chart ) Comparing the first half of with the first half of the gross national product expanded from billion dollars to billion dollars ( annual rates measured in first half of prices ) an increase of about percent. From June to the beginning of total industrial production rose percent. This sharp rise in output was due to fuller utilization of the labor force and continuing large increases in productive capacity. Since January the index of industrial production has shown little increase partly because a number of firms were changing over to defense production partly because of shortages of some specific materials and also because the defense program did not move up fast enough to more than offset a moderate slackening in some types of private demand which occurred during the first half of the year. The total national output of goods and services however continued to expand during the first half of this year. ( See appendix tables B-3 and B-17. ) The expansion in the total labor force and reduction of unemployment during the past months have permitted an expansion of million in civilian employment while at the same time the armed forces were built up nearly to the million objective. The expansion in the total labor force has been much greater than the normal yearly increase. ( See chart and appendix table B-ll. ) In manufacturing the workweek was lengthened about an hour during the second half of In the first months of this year however there appears to have been no further lengthening of hours in most sectors of the economy. In the nondurable goods manufacturing industries there has been a larger than seasonal decline in average working hours brought CHART CHANGES IN THE LABOR FORCE The labor force continued to increase after with a particularly sharp rise following the Korean outbreak. The labor force growth and the reduction of unemployment since the first half of made it possible to approach the armed forces goal and to increase civilian employment at the same time MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * LABOR FORCE TOTAL AGRICULTURAL ^ EMPLOYMENT NON'AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT 1st Half 1st Half PERCENT PARTICIPATION RATE ( TOTAL LABOR FORCE AS PERCENT OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION * ) 1st Half 1st Half * YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE about by a slackening in the demand for soft goods. ( See appendix table B-13. ) At the time of the Korean outbreak there was little idle capacity in the economy measured by normal peacetime standards. Material shortages were an obstacle to further increases in total output both here and abroad But under the impetus of the defense program we have considerably expanded productive capacity and have brought existing capacity into more intensive use. During the past months total private investment in industrial transport and utility plant and equipment amounted to billion dollars ( measured in terms of first half of prices ) In terms of the same price level such expenditures had averaged billion dollars annually during the previous 3J/2 years. Manufacturing capacity has probably expanded percent or more since June In the same interval there have been considerably larger increases in the output of such basic essentials as electric power petroleum copper aluminum and synthetic rubber How much can we expand total output ? This appraisal of our economic growth during the war and postwar periods is important for * evaluating our future opportunities for economic growth In many respects the problems involved in increasing output are now different from and more difficult than those we faced in when resources were much less intensively utilized than at the present time On the other hand our future opportunities for growth can not be assessed simply by extrapolating the rate of economic expansion achieved between World War II and mid-1950. Expansion of output is now much more urgent ; measures for accomplishing this can and should be much more fully exploited Before turning to a discussion of feasible output objectives it should be emphasized that these objectives do not represent predictions. Actual changes in output can be influenced by a variety of unforeseeable circumstances. We are concerned rather with describing our output potential as a means of supplying the necessary quantitative background for a more detailed analysis of major policy problems. The projections described here represent conservative estimates of what can be accomplished by the fuller utilization of our manpower and material resources Over the whole first half of this year the total gross national product was at an average annual rate of billion dollars. In terms of first half of prices the annual rate of gross national product at midyear was in the neighborhood of billion dollars or about percent above the level of a year ago. Measured in terms of this same price level it now appears that we should be able to increase total output by percent or more during the coming months bringing the gross national product to an annual rate of over billion dollars by the middle of ( See chart ) Over the following year the opportunities for further growth will probably diminish somewhat as resources are brought into still fuller use. But it should be feasible also to realize during that period a further increase of at least percent in total output. Thus over the next years we should be able to increase total output at least twice as fast as we did during the period from through the first half of Expansion of our economy at this rate will require that as a nation we work harder and longer and devote considerable resources to economic expansion necessarily at the expense of current consumption. But there is little doubt of our ability to do so. The actual course of production over the next several years will depend more than on any other single factor on whether our security program moves forward as now contemplated If we were compelled to undertake a much larger security program there is little doubt that by harder exertion output could be expanded faster In estimating tne oojectives for total output it is assumed that industrial production will have to increase at a somewhat greater rate than the CHART GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT 1st HALF OF PRICES Total output increased percent comparing the second quarter of I960 with the second quarter of Over the next year it should be possible to increase total output by percent or more BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * OBJECTIVE FOR INCREASED OUTPUT TOTAL PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES PRIVATE GROSS DOMESTIC INVESTMENT * GOV'T PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES AND NET v * " FOREIGN INVESTMENT NOW YEAR AGO * SEASONALLY A D J U S T E D A N N U A L RATES SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS YEAR HENCE nation 's total output of goods and services and that the largest increases will have to occur in industries producing military goods and basic materials It is also essential that most types of agricultural output be expanded Expanding total output by percent or better from the middle of to the middle of next year would involve substantial manpower requirements. As unemployment is already at a low level these requirements would have to be met by further expansion of the labor force and lengthening of the workweek in some industries. In this respect the manpower situation is now much tighter than at the beginning of World War II when almost half of the additional labor requirements could be met by a reduction of unemployment. On the other hand the strength of the armed forces is now near the million objective and nearly all of the further expansion in the labor force will be available to provide additional civilian workers Under present circumstances it would be desirable to meet additional labor requirements primarily through expansion of the labor force. Training a large number of workers would place us in a better position to accelerate quickly the expansion of military output should that become necessary. Over a mobilization period which might be long-lasting an increase in the number of people at work is a more promising source of additional output than is the lengthening of working hours. There is little doubt that we still have large underutilized resources of manpower in the economy including housewives without young children older people members of minority groups and the handicapped many of whom would welcome the opportunity to work. Some women with children can also be drawn into employment if community care facilities are provided Placing major emphasis on labor recruitment would mean that the total labor force would average some 1J/2 to million persons larger in the first half of than it did in the corresponding period of Of this increase some would come from the growth in the population of working age. The proportion of the total population of working age in the labor force would rise to about percent. This compares with a labor participation rate of percent in and slightly above percent in the pre-Korean period Even if the labor force is substantially expanded however it still may be necessary to lengthen the workweek further in a number of industries This will be the case if more serious shortages of some types of equipment develop or if adequate numbers of skilled workers can not be quickly trained It is desirable that a longer than normal workweek not be accompanied by modification of protective legislation and practices with regard to overtime hours and pay. At the same time a number of people who have held parttime jobs may seek and be able to find full-time employment thus further lengthening the average of hours worked Over an extended period of to years we should be able through a sustained high level of investment in expansion and modernization of productive facilities through worker-training programs through the stimulation of industrial research and through other means to increase labor productivity at a faster rate than we realized during past peacetime periods Even though the results may not be immediate all of these means should be used as fully as possible. But in a period as short as a year or two it is extremely conjectural to project productivity advances. Several factors may adversely affect productivity during the next few years. Substantial numbers of untrained workers will be taken into the labor force ; frequent changes in the designs of military equipment will interrupt production ; material shortages may hamper industrial efficiency. On the other hand as defense production increases there will be a shift in the composition of output towards higher productivity industries and the bringing of our resources into fuller use may of itself encourage productivity In projecting total output the Council has assumed that over the next years we can not count on productivity gains of more than percent annually The most important physical limitation on increasing output at the present time is not the availability of manpower but rather shortages of basic materials and power. The major investment programs needed to permit the realization of the production objectives outlined above are discussed below in the section on " The Industrial Build-Up. " Failure to overcome these basic capacity limitations would seriously restrict our opportunities for economic growth for a number of years and thereby prolong the burden of a large security program. As the Western European nations are in a similar position we can not overcome the materials limitation simply by increasing our share of the total free world consumption. We need to place considerable reliance on increasing the output of scarce materials both in this country and abroad MAJOR REQUIRED ADJUSTMENTS IN THE USE OF THE NATION 'S RESOURCES During the intensification of our productive efforts in World War II and again during the redirection of that effort after the war there occurred major changes in the shares of our national output taken for public and consumer use and business investment. These changes reflect in broad outline the shifts which were accomplished in the use of our resources The accomplishment of our current security objectives including the expansion of our capacity to produce is again requiring major shifts in resource use. These changes will not be nearly so severe as those which occurred during and immediately after World War II but they will nevertheless be important in their impact upon the economy. A general description of these required adjustments will serve to indicate the major tasks of production and stabilization policy. This general description will be followed by a detailed analysis in later sections Major changes in the use of output to In before the outbreak of war in Europe had a major effect upon our economy total government purchases of goods and services and " net foreign investment " amounted to about billion dollars ( in terms of first half of prices ) taking about percent of the national output. The total of government purchases plus net foreign investment roughly measures the portion of the national output not available for private domestic use. During the following years the rise in output taken for war purposes increased the annual rate of these expenditures by billion dollars ( in first half of prices ) bringing the total in to billion or about percent of the national output As chart and table show practically the entire increase in the Nation 's output during this period was taken by the combined expansion in government purchases and net foreign investment. The moderate increase in personal consumption was nearly offset by the contraction of gross private domestic investment TABLE Changes in the major components of the gross national product to [ First half of prices ] Change to Major component Gross national product Billions of dollars Government purchases of goods and services and net foreign investment Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Percentage Source : Council of Economic Advisers. For further details see appendix table B-3 The expansion of war expenditures from to over billion dollars in terms of first half of prices was greater than the billion dollar increase shown in total government purchases and net foreign investment combined. Federal nonwar expenditures and the expenditures of State and local governments declined. A large part of the war expenditures went for the production of war materiel shipbuilding the building of war plants and military construction which took in more than half the Nation 's steel output. As we were cut off from many important sources of imports and as our economic assistance to Allied nations increased the total export surplus rose to nearly percent of the national product. From through more than one-half of our total exports in each year were made available through lend-lease The rise in total output and the compression of investment particularly inventory accumulation were sufficient to permit an increase of more than percent in the level of consumption. This increase was represented by CHART CHANGES IN COMPOSITION OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT SINCE 1st HALF OF PRICES During World Warn Government expenditures increased greatly persona I consumption rose and business investment declined markedly. Since mid-1950 both Government expenditures and business investment increased markedly while consumption expenditures remained practically constant BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PERSONAL CONSUMPTIONEXPENDITURES GROSS PRIVATE DOMESTIC INVESTMENT GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AN SERVICES AND NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES GROSS PRIVATE DOMESTIC INVESTMENT GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AN SERVICES AND NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT 1st 2nd Half * * S E A S O N A L L Y ADJUSTED ANNUAL SOURCE : RATES COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS 1st Half * types of consumer output which did not directly compete with war production for scarce materials. But as a proportion of the national output consumption declined from about percent in to percent in As types of investment not needed for the war effort were practically eliminated gross private domestic investment declined from percent to less than percent of total output. Government investment in industrial facilities was substantial however raising the total of such investment considerably above the prewar level. ( See chart page ) The postwar period to mid-1950 From the war production peak to the annual rate of total government purchases and net foreign investment fell by more than billion dollars. The proportion of total output taken for these uses declined from to percent. Despite this contraction however total output fell much more moderately than had been generally expected. The impact of the decline in war expenditures was cushioned by substantial increases in both business investment and personal consumption expenditures. From to total consumption expenditures and gross private domestic investment increased by billion dollars ( in terms of first half of prices ) The combined proportion of the national output rose from a little over one-half to nearly five-sixths. ( See chart and appendix table B-3. ) From through the first half of there were no major changes in the relationship of the major components of the national output. ( See chart ) Gross private domestic investment in equipment construction and additions to business inventories increased from billion dollars to billion ( measured in first half of prices ) ; personal consumption expenditures rose from billion dollars to billion. Their proportion of the national output increased moderately. Total government expenditures and net foreign investment declined both relatively and absolutely. This was brought about mainly by a reduction in the total export surplus. With the rapid progress of reconstruction and recovery abroad the export surplus of goods and services had been falling steadily since The total level of output reached in the first half of was about percent greater than the Nation 's output in The proportion taken for consumption was about the same as in Gross private domestic investment was a somewhat larger proportion of total output ; government expenditures and net foreign investment combined took a smaller proportion of the national product. Despite the fact that we were maintaining a much larger military establishment and still continuing a large foreign assistance program total Federal expenditures for goods and services took only percent of the gross national product in the first half of compared with percent in The relative increase in cash outlays was somewhat greater as cash payments included interest payments on the national debt and veterans ' benefits Changes in the composition of the Nation 's output from the first half of to the first half of Comparing the 6-month period preceding the Korean outbreak with the first half of the total national output rose from billion dollars to billion. ( All of these comparisons are at an annual rate in terms of first half of prices as shown in appendix table B-3 and chart ) About half of the billion dollar increase in total output was represented by expansion of government expenditures and net foreign investment Of the 15/2 billion dollar increase in these outlays nearly billion was represented by the expanding security program. The other half of the increase in total output went mainly into private investment especially inventory accumulation. Consumer expenditures in real terms after the subsidence of the post-Korean buying waves were only slightly higher in the first half of than during the first half of During the past year therefore the security programs have not required a net diversion of resources from other uses. The portion of the increased total output taken for security purposes was not so great as to prevent a large expansion of output for other purposes Prospective changes in government outlays private investment and consumption Realization of our security objectives will require that during the next year there must be a contraction in total output available for consumption and gross private domestic investment. The scheduled increase in security programs as described earlier would raise total government expenditures by about billion dollars from the first half of to the first half of Even if we are successful in expanding total output by percent or more there still would have to occur a reduction in output available for nonsecurity purposes. If the increase were percent the contraction would have to be to billion dollars. In other words even if we achieve a sizeable expansion of total output almost half of the increase in output for security purposes would have to be met by a diversion of resources from other uses including public nondefense activities The largest contraction may be expected in gross private domestic investment. During the first half of this total was at an annual rate of billion dollars and will probably be reduced by something in the neighborhood of billion dollars by the first half of The major reasons for the projected decline are first that inventory accumulation is expected to decline markedly as business comes to expect greater price stability and as inventory and credit controls become more effective ; and second that some types of investment in construction and equipment will be limited or postponed because of the nonavailability of materials either for construction or operation of new facilities. On the other hand despite the projected decline in total gross private domestic investment from recent levels investment in productive facilities should be maintained at a rate as high as or higher than in most recent years though not as high as in early The effort to increase output will have to be undertaken without the impetus given workers by the large increase in consumption which ordinarily accompanies a more intensive labor effort. Even if we are successful in increasing total output by percent or more over the next year realization of our security objectives will prevent average family consumption from rising significantly. Consumption may decline as a proportion of the total national output from percent in the first half of to about percent in the first half of and about percent in the first half of At the same time there almost certainly will be a large rise in spendable income mainly associated with the increase in employment and output As will be elaborated in Part III the inevitably disproportionate developments in incomes and consumer supplies are of major significance in assessing the magnitude of the inflation problem THE CURRENT NATIONAL SECURITY PROGRAM The two preceding sections have set forth our general objectives for economic expansion and the general nature of the economic adjustments which should be accomplished during the next year. We can expand total output by percent or more comparing the middle of this year with the middle of next year if as a nation we work harder and longer and concentrate the build-up of our industrial capacity in certain key sectors of the economy. Even if we expand total output by percent however the build-up in our national security programs would require a sizeable diversion of resources from other uses This section describes in greater detail the nature of the security program with respect both to its domestic and international economic implications In the following two sections the nature of the required industrial build-up will be elaborated and the adjustments which will have to be made in less essential types of public and private investment and in our consumption standards will be described in further detail Size of the security program During the second quarter of total security expenditures measured in terms of deliveries of military goods for our forces and our Allies military payrolls and expenditures on other foreign aid and domestic security programs reached an annual rate of over billion dollars. In terms of constant prices the total was nearly double the pre-Korean level and percent above the rate reached in the fourth quarter of As shown in table these expenditures are scheduled to increase to an annual rate of over billion dollars in the fourth quarter of this year and nearly billion dollars in the second quarter of Detailed programs have not as yet been worked out for the period beyond June but it is now contemplated that the rate of expenditures will be even higher in the fiscal year The share of our total output used for security purposes would rise from about percent during the second quarter of to more than percent in the fourth quarter of this year and to a take of almost percent in the second quarter of TABLE National security program : deliveries of military goods and other expenditures1 [ First half of prices seasonally adjusted annual rates ] National security expenditures Period Billions of dollars Second quarter Fourth quarter Second quarter8 Scheduled : Fourth quarter Second quarter. Percentage of gross national product _ _ Includes certain work put in place and accumulation of inventories for the military account Estimate based on incomplete data Approximate Sources : Bureau of the Budget Department of Defense and Council of Economic Advisers It is important to note that these estimates of the timing of the program are based on the value of scheduled deliveries rather than on expected Treasury expenditures. Neither deliveries nor payments furnish a wholly satisfactory measure of the economic impact of Government procurement which begins to be felt as soon as and even before contracts are placed Owing to the lag in expenditures behind deliveries the total value of deliveries will be somewhat greater than actual Treasury disbursements during the period of program build-up. Thus for the fiscal year it is estimated that the value of goods delivered to the military services including certain work put in place and accumulation of inventories for military account will be in the neighborhood of billion dollars greater than expenditures Reaching these objectives will involve serious production problems The types of equipment which we are now producing or preparing to produce are generally much more complicated than World War II military equipment. Moreover in a mobilization which is defensive in purpose and therefore protracted it is undesirable to stabilize weapon designs to the extent which would be appropriate in wartime. For this reason we shall not be able to realize all the production economies which might accompany an all-out effort. The highly specialized nature of some of the equipment will result in serious difficulties in obtaining adequate component supplies. A serious machine tool problem has already developed just as it did during World War II. Because of these and other difficulties military production has not moved up as fast as was earlier contemplated Nevertheless there can be no doubt that these programs measured by their rate of build-up and by the level which would finally be reached are well within the capabilities of our economy. Compared with the rise of almost billion dollars in security expenditures scheduled for the coming months we increased war expenditures by no less than billion dollars ( in terms of first half of prices ) in the first year of our participation in World War II. The present program is expected to absorb not more than percent of our national output at its peak compared with percent in A year from now the program is expected to require about million men and women directly or indirectly engaged in defense activity ( including those in the armed services ) This figure compares with about million at the peak of World War II General character of the security program More than percent of the total security budget for fiscal is for building up the military establishment of this country and providing our North Atlantic partners with military assistance. The foreign economic aid programs as proposed by the President will decline further in fiscal to about percent of the security budget. The remainder will be divided among stockpiling atomic energy and other security-related programs. ( See chart ) The current major objectives for strengthening our military establishment are fivefold : First to maintain our armed forces at a strength of million men ; second to provide for equipping and maintaining the equivalent of army divisions ; third to build the Air Force toward the objective of air wings ; fourth to maintain an active naval fleet of over ships with the necessary aircraft and supporting elements and the Fleet Marine Force of 25/3 divisions with essential aircraft and supporting units ; and fifth to establish a defense production base which could be expanded very rapidly in the event of full mobilization Though the foreign aid expenditures represent a relatively small part of the total program they are of great importance to the realization of our policy objectives in the international field. The expenditures for foreign military and economic aid in fiscal represent a major part of our most essential export requirements but do not include export of essential goods to countries which can pay us out of their own resources Even though such exports do not involve financial aid and may in fact be paid for by shipment of goods to us they constitute a high-priority demand upon our total production and in some cases upon our supply of scarce goods TO CHART FEDERAL BUDGET EXPENDITURES Security programs took percent of budget expenditures in fiscal They are scheduled to take percent in fiscal BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS FISCAL YEARS ESTIMATED TOTAL * ALL OTHER PROGRAMS OTHER SECURITY PROGRAMS * ' DEPT. OF DEFENSE AND MDAP fe * SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET The impact of military production programs on materials The impact of expanding security outlays on the economy is accentuated by the fact that a large part of the increase is represented by outlays for military equipment defense production facilities and military construction. At the end of June about billion dollars of military orders were outstanding. Military orders are currently being placed at the rate of about billion dollars a month. Deliveries of military hard goods which include items of major procurement such as aircraft tanks and ammunition as well as some machine tools and equipment used in defense plants are scheduled to rise from a rate of about billion dollars in June of this year to about times that level next June. Within the same period aircraft deliveries are scheduled to be tripled and deliveries of tanks and automotive vehicles increased to times the level of this June. More than half of the increase in total hard goods deliveries is scheduled to take place by the end of this year. ( A more detailed description of our military production targets appears in the Second Quarterly Report of the Director of Defense Mobilization. ) Military and public industrial construction is scheduled to increase to an annual rate of about billion dollars by the summer of which is approximately equal to percent of the present near-record volume of total public and private construction. A large part of this construction will be in the form of training facilities and airfields Peak material requirements for these programs will necessarily precede the peak of scheduled deliveries of equipment. Chart shows the expected military requirements for copper steel and aluminum as percentages of total anticipated supply. Since a substantial increase in supply is planned in the case of steel and an even larger percentage increase in the case of aluminum the period of maximum stringency in these materials will have passed before the peak rate of deliveries is attained. If military production objectives are attained the percentage of our steel aluminum and copper supplies going for military uses will have to increase very rapidly between the second quarter of this year and the first quarter of The estimates in chart do not include stockpiling requirements which are sizeable for copper and aluminum. Moreover the impact of military requirements is CHART MILITARY REQUIREMENTS FOR BASIC METALS PERCENT OF EXPECTED SUPPLY The proportion of steel copper and aluminum supplies taken for military production will nearly double within the next year PERCENT PERCENT ~ NOTE : EXCLUDES REQUIREMENTS FOR STOCKPILING SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE even greater in the case of some specific shapes and types of these metals than the over-all figures disclose For many of the materials required in the military production programs we are largely and in some cases almost wholly dependent on imported supplies. No less than of the strategic materials comprising the stockpiling program come wholly or partly from foreign sources. Other security programs and essential civilian needs add further to our requirements for these materials. Even with limitation of nonessential uses major increases in imports are needed in commodities such as cobalt copper iron ore nickel manganese crude petroleum tungsten and zinc The impact of the common security programs on materials In addition to the increased requirements arising from our domestic security programs and from our program of military aid to our Allies there are other essential requirements of foreign countries which must be met as part of the effort to attain the free world 's security objectives. A large part of the common security program consists of the expenditures which the other North Atlantic Treaty countries are making out of their own resources for their military establishments. They must buy capital equipment and raw materials to support this expansion of military production. Foreign countries must buy equipment to maintain and expand capacity to produce raw materials which are in short supply and to provide power transport and other facilities to support the operation of such productive capacity. Goods are also needed to maintain the civilian economies and political stability of friendly foreign countries to reduce the dependence of some of them on unfriendly countries and to support development projects in some areas where development of resources will strengthen social cohesion and the will and ability to resist aggression These requirements like our own must be met from the total production of the free world. They include not only United States goods financed with our foreign economic aid but also goods purchased from the United States which the importing countries finance themselves as well as goods they produce themselves or purchase from other foreign countries which help supply the United States economy. Where they involve scarce goods the problem is to increase production ; and if that is not sufficient to limit nonessential uses throughout the free world The estimating of free world supplies and requirements for major raw materials is now in process through the International Materials Conference and other channels. On the basis of present estimates it appears that in the coming months there will be shortages of aluminum cobalt copper zinc nitrogen sulfur tungsten molybdenum nickel iron ore petroleum steel tin wood pulp and perhaps a number of other materials. Despite increased production of many scarce commodities it will be necessary to control nonessential consumption. Agreement has recently been reached on interim plans for international allocation of sulfur tungsten and molybdenum The United States consumes very large proportions of the free world 's total production of many basic commodities. As a result relatively small percentage cuts in our consumption may alleviate appreciably the pressure upon supplies available for other countries. Our share of free world consumption has in most cases increased considerably since before the war although in many cases our contribution to the total production of the free world has also increased. This is shown in table below and in appendix table B-18 TABLE United States consumption and production of selected commodities as percentages of free world production [ Percent ] 193S i Commodity Items not largely imported : Bread grains Coarse grains ._ _ ._ Cotton Fats and oils _ __._ _ _. Fertilizer ( nitrogenous ) Lumber _ _ Meat Sulfur : Native All forms _ __ _ _ Items imported in substantial quantities : Aluminum __ _ Cohalt Coffee ( green ) s Copper _ _ Iron ore Lead * Manganese ore Newsprint __ Nickel Petroleum Rubber ( natural and synthetic ) Sugar ( raw equivalent ) Tin * _ Tungsten Wood pulp ( mechanical and chemical ) Wool Zinc * 1951/52 production Consumptions Production Consumption Production ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * Other years used for some commodities. For further details see appendix table B-18 Apparent consumption ( production plus imports minus exports ) except for some commodities noted in appendix table B-18 for which estimates of actual consumption are used. Additions to domestic stocks are included in apparent consumption * Includes butter and peanuts < Not available Production represents metal content of mine production Source : Compiled by the Department of State From the point of view of the United States the limitation of nonessential uses of some commodities will be necessary to make goods available for export and for essential domestic use and to limit the need for imports. In general it appears that the exports of commodities in short supply in the United States will be small in relation to total United States production of those commodities. The highest proportions exported are likely to occur in the cases of cotton and sulfur. In the case of sulfur our production will fall substantially short of export requirements and normal domestic demand In foods export requirements are not expected to be a major determinant of domestic supplies. The level of civilian food consumption in the United States during the next months will be determined largely by this year 's crop production. The major imported foods such as coffee and cocoa are likely to be plentiful THE INDUSTRIAL BUILD-UP Over-all investment objectives The special needs of the present emergency impose certain objectives for domestic investment. For the immediate future the objectives are to assure adequate and sufficiently maintained capacity for direct military production exports essential to our security and essential domestic civilian needs ; and in addition to build up reserve capacity for items which will be needed in greatly increased quantity if international conditions become more critical. Over a somewhat longer period it is likewise important to provide the investment in facilities essential to the rapid over-all growth of the national economy and thus make it possible to remove direct restrictive controls on civilian consumption while continuing to support the military establishment in a high state of readiness and making our contribution to the security and progress of the free world A primary basis for this continued growth is a high level of investment in more and better capital goods. It is evident however that the current level of business demand for equipment and construction materials could not be met without delaying the build-up of military power or disrupting the civilian economy. While the maintenance of a high level of investment is imperative the composition of investment must shift to reflect the urgency of some types and the postponability of others Both the level and the composition of investment have changed Strikingly since ( See chart ) During World War II the physical volume of gross private domestic investment dropped to less than percent of the level. Nonindustrial construction was severely curtailed to save materials and labor. Private investment in industrial facilities was likewise at a fairly low level after but this reflected the fact that a substantial part of the industrial expansion of the period took the form of Governmentowned plants and equipment. The total rate of investment in industrial facilities both private and public rose to an all-time record in and then fell off rapidly In comparison the period from to the middle of showed a much larger share of resources going into private investment than was the case during World War II. This reflected both Government with- CHART GROSS PRIVATE DOMESTIC INVESTMENT 1st HALF OF PRICES Business investment has risen rapidly during the past year. Increases in equipment purchases and in the rate of inventory accumulation account for the entire growth in total business investment from the first half of I960 to the first half of BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS GOVERNMENT OUTLAYS FOR INDUSTRIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SERVICE FACILITIES JULY TO JULY * CHANGE NEGATIVE ^ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES MOTE : INDUSTRIAL CONSTRUCTION'INCLUDES MANUFACTURING * IN ! N AND PUBLIC UTILITIES SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S drawal from the industrial facilities field and the availability of materials and equipment for nonwar types of expansion and modernization Nonfarm housing construction outlays adjusted to first half prices rose rapidly from the level of billion dollars to well over double that annual rate in the first half of Nonresidential private construction on the same price basis jumped quickly in to a level exceeding anything since and held that level with only moderate changes throughout the succeeding years. Producers ' durable equipment purchases already at an all-time high in increased percent further by ; and after a moderate let-down in were again approaching a new record in the months before Korea. Accumulation of business inventories was more rapid than usual in and again in but gave way to temporary liquidation in the recession During the months which have elapsed since Korea gross private domestic investment has claimed a record share of total national output : nearly percent compared with less than percent in the period from to and about percent in the period from to the middle of Comparing the first half of with the first half of the physical volume of total gross private domestic investment increased percent ; that of inventory accumulation percent ; producers ' durable equipment purchases percent ; and construction other than residential and farm percent. The volume of residential and farm construction after reaching an all-time high in the second half of was percent lower in the first half of than in the corresponding period of ( See appendix table B-5. ) This unprecedented level of all-round private investment made possible by the ample financial resources available was induced by the upsurge in consumer demand following the Korean outbreak ; by the widespread desire to hasten construction and equipment projects and to accumulate inventories in anticipation of increasing shortages and higher prices ; and in the more recent part of the months ' period by the actual impact of defense orders and the stimulus of Government aids to expansion. Restrictions through credit terms materials control and direct licensing of some types of construction have been reflected in actual reductions of some forms of investment only during the past few months During the next few years fulfillment of our objectives will entail a further curtailment of those types of investment which contribute least to our productive strength. This includes residential commercial recreational and also some kinds of industrial construction. Inventory accumulation likewise should be kept at a minimum and should represent a considerably smaller drain as the military production program levels off. Total outlays for industrial utility and transport expansion however should be encouraged to continue at levels somewhat higher than in The pattern of investment for and is likely to be intermediate between that of full peacetime prosperity and that of peak full-war mobilization effort such as in and when Government investment was very great Plant and equipment Expansion and modernization of productive facilities is for the next few years the crucial sector of investment. Such investment provides the capacity needed to meet our security and growth objectives. But this type of investment calls for much more steel and other scarce items dollar for dollar than do other types such as housing or commercial building Moreover related types of capacity expansion must be kept in balance and we must avoid waste of resources in setting up facilities for which adequate materials will not be available to support their operation It is especially important therefore that programs of facilities expansion be evaluated as carefully as possible with regard for their contribution to needed production their properly balanced relationship and the magnitude of their short-term drain on resources Our manufacturing capacity was being expanded during the five years following World War II at an average rate of percent a year. ( See chart ) A roughly similar rate of expansion prevailed in the electric power industry. The total capital outlays involved for expansion plus modernization and replacement of manufacturing facilities averaged about 7y2 billion dollars a year which at first half of prices would be the equivalent of about billion dollars. Nearly four-fifths of the total nonfarm plant and equipment outlays were spent in the mining manufacturing transport and utilities fields. ( See appendix table B-20. ) Despite the impressive increase in capacity during this period our productive capacity appeared to be in mid-1950 close to full utilization by normal peacetime standards The growth of total national product set forth as a realizable objective in a previous section of this Review is estimated to call for a continued growth of industrial capacity at a rate at least equal to the percent annual average of the postwar period and a level of total outlays for plant and equipment roughly comparable to that of Considerably larger outlays would be involved if business went ahead with investment plans on the scale suggested by surveys made at the end of and early this year Priorities in expansion Within this total amount of investment in facilities expansion a greatly increased share should be devoted to the kinds of expansion most urgently needed First in priority is the capacity expansion needed to produce the military supplies for existing security programs with a margin for a possible CHART EXPANSION IN INDUSTRIAL CAPACITY TO END OF Capacity in most major industries increased faster in the postwar period than during World War n. Business plans for as reported early this year reflected a further acceleration of expansion INDEX = INDEX * TOTAL AND DURABLE MANUFACTURING AUTOS JP ^ J> ^ T * ^ i ? * * * ^ * STEEL * I JAN DEC. DEC ^ INDEX * INDEX & TOTAL AND NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING '200 JAN ABASED ON EXPECTATIONS AS REPORTED IN EARLY SOURCE : MCGRAW-HILL PUBLISHING COMPANY DEC DEC quick step-up to full war production schedules should the need be imposed on us. In the period from to this type of capacity expansion absorbed a large share of the Nation 's investment of both private and public funds. About five-eighths of the total outlays for expansion of manufacturing facilities was in the field of aircraft ships ordnance combat and other motorized vehicles and chemicals ( including aviation gasoline and synthetic rubber ) amounting to more than billion dollars at first half of prices. In those areas the bulk of the investment was Federally financed The present program for expansion of capacity for direct military items is considerably less extensive. This reflects not merely the lower level of military procurement now contemplated but also the fact that we have a substantial reserve of suitable plants used in World War II. Reequipment and reactivation of a large share of these reserve facilities was started in and the further program now envisaged runs mainly in terms of such action rather than the building of new plants. The major Government industrial plant construction program is that of the Atomic Energy Commission The Department of Defense plans to spend approximately billion dollars from fiscal and funds for expansion of facilities for production of specialized military items components and materials. Threefourths of this represents purchase of equipment a major part of which will be installed in privately-owned structures. Expansion of aircraft production facilities will absorb nearly half the total sum In addition a much smaller though substantial private investment in equipment and structures for war materiel production is under way. Its magnitude is roughly indicated by the fact that tax amortization certificates have been requested for nearly a billion dollars of private investment in aircraft and other munitions production facilities and already issued on nearly million dollars. In addition a substantial part of the contemplated private investment in facilities for electrical electronic and other equipment and in other basically civilian-type industries is designed to provide capacity to serve military needs Outside the sphere of facilities expansions directly needed for military production there are some other types of investment also deserving of high priority because they are designed to augment the supply of materials products and services on which our all-around productive strength and its growth depend. Our general objectives will also require expansion of some of our basic industries to sustain the economy in readiness for full mobilization. This will include expansion of capacity for producing aluminum and other light metals requiring substantial additions to electric power capacity in some areas ; provisions for increasing our supplies of steel copper ferro-alloys and several other metals and minerals ; and enlargement of our transportation capacity. Expansion of supplies available from foreign sources is an important aspect of several of these programs Goals are taking shape for the principal expansion programs and substantial progress has been made toward their realization. The status of some of these programs will be outlined below In cases such as aluminum and certain alloy metals and chemicals the production of war materiel itself will absorb a large part of the supply This is true also of certain steel mill products and even of electric power in a few specific areas. In the case of such basic types of capacity as transport equipment petroleum production and refining and power and steel in the aggregate the case for expansion at this time rests on the desirability of maintaining the strength of our productive system in general and not allowing the immediate demands of civilian consumers to inhibit the longer-range growth on which both our military security and our economic welfare ultimately depend But in a period when resources are scarce we can not afford to promote or even permit all types of investment which make some contribution to total output of any sort. Some kinds of output will be more important than others during the next few years and some kinds of investment will make a more effective and useful contribution to output than do others In judging what kinds of capacity expansion in addition to those kinds closely related to short-run security needs may deserve special consideration in this situation relevant considerations include these : ( a ) Expansion at bottlenecks is more quickly productive than expansion of facilities which can not be fully utilized for some time to come. For example expansion of retail store capacity in a community already fairly adequately served in this respect merely lowers the degree of utilization of that type of capacity and contributes little to total output. As another example expansion of any type of final processing capacity over and above what can be supplied with materials is relatively unproductive. On the other hand increased supplies of certain machine tools will remove an important production bottleneck ( ) In general expansion of domestic productive capacity should not be pushed when there is a safe and economical alternative of utilizing similar idle facilities in friendly countries abroad. Such utilization can avoid unnecessary drains on scarce resources to build facilities here while at the same time helping to strengthen the economies of those countries ( c ) One purpose of the increase of general civilian supplies is to make possible the relaxation of irksome and costly controls and to help in curbing inflation. Easing of shortages of cost-of-living items which give rise to cumulative inflationary pressure should presumably be rated high in this category. The need however is primarily for larger capacity to produce the basic materials going into such items rather than for larger final processing capacity ( d ) Easing of materials shortages which severely restrict opportunities for small business is desirable wherever feasible Expansion objectives in specific industries Progress has been made in recent months toward resolving the broad picture of prospective production requirements into objectives and programs for the expansion of capacity for specific products. A brief examination of some of the most important of these objectives and programs will indicate the pattern of expansion which is taking shape its impact on current shortages and subsequent contribution to supplies and some of the necessary interrelations among programs Although a substantial part of the contemplated expansion represents definite business plans and projects with various types of Government assistance already approved or pending the goals are still not finally established in most cases and much remains to be done in firming-up and scheduling individual expansion projects Apart from the expansion of capacity for making finished munitions discussed at an earlier point the expansion programs which have been formulated and set in motion are mainly designed to meet the urgent need for larger supplies of metals and other basic materials energy sources and transportation Steel copper and aluminum occupy a special role in the programming of production expansion. All are in short supply particularly the last two and all have such pervasive and important uses throughout the economy that now as in World War II their allocation through the Controlled Materials Plan is the main basis for production controls. These three metals however by no means represent the only areas of major shortage where accelerated expansion is needed. Important expansion programs are being formulated and put into effect in such fields as petroleum production and refining electric power transportation chemicals and metalworking In the light of these programs it is evident that the pattern of plant and equipment expenditures will show quite a sharp break with the past The impact of Government programs in aid of facilities expansion will fall primarily in certain industries where there is a clear need for accelerated expansion. Investment in iron and steel petroleum products chemicals transportation and electric and gas utility facilities accounts for roughly two-thirds of the outlays for which tax amortization certificates of necessity have been requested and about the same proportion of the amount of certificates thus far granted. ( See table page ) The magnitude of expansion goals suggests investment in these industries over the next or years running considerably above the rate of to * /2 billion dollars Capacity expansion in machinery nonferrous metals ordnance pulp and paper and a number of other important industries also is being actively stimulated and is absorbing an increasing share of resources With a large step-up in the rate of expansion and investment in these major fields and with the supply of materials inadequate for any great increase in over-all plant and equipment outlays investment in fields of lower priority must clearly fall considerably short of the level and still farther below the levels originally contemplated in business plans for as reported in surveys made earlier this year. To make the higherpriority expansions possible it is necessary to restrain the investment outlays of other lines of business notably trade and recreational services food processing apparel and a variety of manufacturing industries where capacity is already reasonably in line with the supplies of material which can be made available to those industries under shortage conditions Iron and steel. The programs in this area involve ore mining and transportation facilities coke ovens blast furnaces and steel furnaces and still other related types of investment such as refractories plants. There are difficult problems of keeping the various interrelated programs in step so that capacity at all stages can be utilized as fully as possible The expansion under way in the steel industry is expected to increase total ingot capacity to nearly million tons by the end of compared with million tons at present. This program will require to percent of the supply of steel and about the same proportion of the copper supply over this period. It will involve private investment outlays of about billion dollars which represent not only a large increase over the pre-Korean rate of investment in this industry but also a sizeable part of total prospective outlays for industrial facilities To accomplish this expansion in the time proposed will tax the ability of producers of specialized heavy equipment and components. Full utilization of the expanded steelmaking capacity will also mean increased demand for metallic materials and fuel. It is hoped to meet this demand by taking advantage of recent technical improvements which increase the effective capacity of blast furnaces by expanded direct use of high-grade imported ores in open-hearth steel furnaces by increasing ore production and imports and by collecting more scrap Increased scrap collections and increased use of Lake Superior highgrade ores are both only temporary contributions to the supply of materials. By an estimated million short tons a year of iron ore will be required compared with million in To meet this requirement it will be necessary to step up the rate of production at the Lake Superior mines which will hasten the depletion of that source. Increased dependence on imported ores over the longer run appears inevitable. New mines in Venezuela and Liberia will furnish substantial amounts of ore before and Labrador is expected to become an important source by about Beneficiation of low-grade taconite ores is not expected to contribute sub- stantially to total supply for some years. To provide for efficient use of new ore sources in supplying our major inland steel production areas in the face of a decline in Lake Superior ore supply initiation of the St. Lawrence Seaway project is an urgent need With a sufficient supply of materials to support full utilization of the planned steelmaking capacity the output of finished steel mill products which rose from million tons in to an annual rate of about million in the first half of could rise by or million tons in each of the next years Military and atomic energy requirements for finished steel under present programs are expected to reach by about mid-195 a peak annual rate at least million tons higher than in and to million tons higher than in the first half of Since the supply of steel can grow by only about the same amounts total nonmilitary uses of steel must be held down to about the level through most of at least. In some specific shapes of steel such as structural shapes and plates there are much more serious stringencies than the over-all figures disclose The use of steel in machinery and equipment for expansion conversion and upkeep of productive facilities has increased considerably above levels and can not be reduced much during the next year or two if our industrial build-up objectives are to be met. Even after allowance for an expected reduction in the amount of steel going into inventories it appears that substantially less steel will be available than in and early for consumer durable goods and the less essential types of construction Substantial cuts have already been made in most of these uses With adjustments of this character the shortage of steel need not significantly impair the maintenance and build-up of our national security during the next few years. If national defense programs continue in subsequent years at levels now contemplated the squeeze on consumer durable goods and nondefense construction should begin to relax by ; and continuation of steel capacity expansion at a more moderate rate thereafter should make possible a fairly rapid return to free use of steel. Expansion of finished steel output to about million tons in the next few years which would require full utilization of about million tons of ingot-producing capacity would support continued economic growth residential and public contraction on at least as large a scale as in and the satisfaction of normal demands for consumer durable goods Aluminum. The expansion program proposed by the Defense Minerals Administration calls for increasing primary aluminum production by ingot tons or percent from the level of tons This would mean a total output objective of tons by the end of to be achieved mainly by construction of new capacity. Reactivation of existing stand-by plants will provide tons of the increase and tons will come from improvements increasing output at facilities now in operation. The capital outlays involved are estimated at over million dollars compared with very small investments in such facilities in the postwar period. Approximately half of this expansion program is already assigned to aluminum companies with tax amortization approved The expansion of aluminum capacity is given further support by Government contracts guaranteeing a 5-year market for the output of specified new facilities More than two-thirds of the aluminum capacity expansion is planned for the Gulf Southwest states and will use electricity generated from natural gas. Because of the need to bring this production in speedily these locations near the gas fields have been desirable. However for longer-range additions to capacity cheaper aluminum can be produced by means of hydroelectric power which may be developed in large quantities and at low cost on the Columbia and St. Lawrence Rivers and at Canadian and Alaskan sites Imports of aluminum from Canada are expected to furnish to percent of the supply of primary metal this year ; but any enlargement of imports must await the further expansion of production facilities. ^ Our direct national security needs for aluminum accounted for less than one-tenth of requirements in but will take about half the supply in With the contemplated expansion program and the requirements entailed in the present defense program including the strategic stockpile civilian use of aluminum will have to be restricted until but can expand thereafter along a growth trend rising at the rate of percent a year from This trend projection appears conservative in the light of the past rate of increase in aluminum use. Any over-supply appears unlikely in view of the known opportunities for extensive and economical substitution of aluminum for copper a metal which seems likely to remain in short supply for an indefinite period. Substitution for steel is also important especially in military uses Under full mobilization at any time in the near future military requirements for aluminum would increase greatly and would force a much more drastic cutback in civilian use Copper. In contrast to steel and aluminum the possibilities for increasing our supplies of copper are severely limited. It is estimated that by the total supply available to this country including imports can be increased by only percent over and then only by carrying forward investment programs both in this country and abroad and by purchases above present ceiling prices. The contemplated investment in domestic copper mines amounting to about million dollars will hardly more than stave off an actual decline of production arising from depletion By it is hoped to increase imports which in accounted for about percent of our supply of new copper by at least one-fourth above the level On the basis of the current partial mobilization program and a curtailment of copper use in consumer durable goods by percent from the high level of the first half of supplies of copper might be balanced with requirements for the next few years. However the need for additional supplies is acute if any allowance is to be made for growth in civilian use and much more acute should full mobilization become necessary The latter eventuality would require extremely severe restriction of civilian demand Over the longer run the most promising solution of our copper problem lies in the development of adequate substitutes in both civilian and military uses. Aluminum is the most promising substitute ; but no relief from that source is in sight until after even under presently planned defense programs Petroleum and refined products. The program formulated by the Petroleum Administration for Defense calls for a percent increase in domestic producing and refining capacity in the 3-year period to This is designed to leave modest margins of spare capacity by assuming no curtailment of imports and allowing for a roughly doubled military demand plus a continued increase in civilian demand The program is aimed at achieving a larger margin of capacity in crude production than in refining because of our present partial dependence on crude imports and because it is difficult to gauge accurately in advance the success of exploratory drilling operations in actually developing new production. A much larger margin is to be provided in the case of facilities for special components needed for aircraft fuel to provide for needs during the first year of a possible war while still further expansion of such facilities would be in progress To achieve the projected capacity increases it would appear that the investment outlays of the petroleum industry would run moderately higher during the next three years than in either or even in the absence of further cost increases. The difficulty and expense of exploratory drilling are gradually increasing which implies a rising cost of maintaining the growth of oil production capacity and proven reserves The petroleum expansion program involves a large drain on critical materials especially steel. Including oil and gas production refining transportation storage and marketing facilities the expansion programs will require nearly percent of the entire prospective supply of steel over the next years A full-scale war or continued political difficulties in the Middle East might result indirectly in a sharp reduction of our imports now furnishing about an eighth of our supply. Even with present imports war requirements would be so substantial that civilian rationing would immediately become necessary. Between and civilian consumption was reduced by about percent under rationing. Since any great reduction in civilian use of petroleum products would interfere with maintenance of transportation services heating and industrial production the capacity expansion now planned appears to be an essential precaution Electric power. Power demand as measured by the seasonal peak load increased percent between December and December Despite a large building program during these years the reserve margin is now less than percent. The presently proposed expansion would provide for meeting the expected December peak load with the percent reserve margin which is considered adequate. The reserve position in certain regions of the country especially the Pacific Northwest and parts of the Southeast is much more critical than nationwide estimates show The proposed program calls for a percent increase of electric utility generating capacity from to million kilowatts during the 3-year period to A significant part of this expansion is needed for expanded production of light metals and radioactive materials for national security purposes. The total outlays for generating plants and associated transmission and other facilities are estimated at to billion dollars Most of this will be spent by private utility companies whose outlays are expected to run roughly a third higher on an average yearly basis than in and This electric utility expansion program would take during the years to about 2J/2 percent of the total supply of steel percent of the supply of aluminum and percent of the supply of copper. The relatively heavy demands which the power expansion program places on basic and scarce materials and critical equipment items indicate the need for periodic re-evaluation of the various segments of the program to make certain that the more essential projects get the right of way. However the fundamental and indispensable role of electric power in the economy especially the wide variety of its uses means that a deficiency of electric power would pose a serious threat to the whole production expansion program Although power requirements would not be very much greater under full mobilization than under the presently planned defense programs wartime experience here and abroad has demonstrated the extreme practical difficulties of curtailing less essential uses _.- Other programs. In addition to these large and basic programs there are numerous others which though of less general importance in American industry are vital at specific points One of the needed materials is manganese necessary in the steel industry. At present nine-tenths of our supply of metallurgical manganese is imported. The expected increases in domestic production and imports during the next or years will satisfy our metallurgical requirements but will not permit stockpile objectives to be met in full. Substantial additional supplies might be made available after from low-grade ore deposits and small mines and particularly from the wide application of technological improvements in the recovery of manganese from slags. These processes now in the experimental pilot-project stage appear very promising Sulfur in the form of sulfuric acid is essential in a wide range of industries including fertilizers petroleum chemicals paints and iron and steel In other forms it is used in pulp manufacture and other processes. The proposed expansion program is designed to increase sulfur supply by about long tons or percent over the domestic output by the end of The cost of this program may run in the neighborhood of million dollars on a portion of which application has been made for tax amortization assistance. Domestic demand alone at present prices would probably increase considerably more than the proposed expansion of output. A balancing of supply with domestic and essential export needs will call for wider use of conservation and recovery methods and the expansion of production of sulfur from pyrites both here and abroad A plan to cope with the shortage of sulfur throughout the free world by voluntary international allocations has just been worked out by the International Materials Conference which recently announced such allocation plans for molybdenum and tungsten as well Nitrogen is essential for fertilizers industrial explosives and other industrial uses and especially in full-scale war for military explosives. The expansion program proposed by the National Production Authority calls for increasing domestic production capacity for synthetic ammonia from million tons of nitrogen content at present to about million by the end of Of this increase million could be achieved by reactivation of a relatively high-cost Army reserve plant. The proposed expansion would involve capital outlays of about million dollars With this program the requirements as estimated by the National Production Authority could be met during the period to under the presently planned mobilization program. Further expansion of supply to about million tons by the end of would be needed however if enough nitrate fertilizer were to be made available to produce feed to keep meat production at present levels without further drawing upon grain reserves. An all-out war would give rise to a heavy additional demand for nitrogen for the manufacture of explosives IMPACT OF THE SECURITY PROGRAM ON CONSUMPTION STANDARDS While the defense effort is being pushed to peak levels important changes in composition of consumer goods production will take place although total consumption will probably be relatively stable near the present level which is about percent above that of In this respect the period will be considerably different from the early phases of the World War II mobilization period. Consumption rose percent between and and increased in all subsequent years except A brief review of the war and postwar period will reveal notable CHART CHANGES IN PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES 1st HALF OF PRICES Total consumption expenditures in constant dollars have increased percent since with expenditures for durables rising percent BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS too SOURCE- COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS progress in raising standards of consumption throughout the population over the last years and indicates that a period of slower progress or even curtailments in consumer goods in the next year or two would still leave us well off as a nation. ( See chart ) The growth of consumption to By the output of consumption goods had risen by percent from the depth of the depression although there were still substantial numbers unemployed. Relatively large additions were made in stocks of automobiles and durable household goods in consumers ' hands ; in million automobiles million electric refrigerators and million washing machines were purchased. As shown in chart per capita consumption of nondurable goods and services in was about percent below present levels. As the war progressed per capita consumption of nondurable goods and services rose in every successive year though due to difficulties of measurement the estimates may overstate the actual increase. Despite large shipments of food to our Allies abroad the diet of the American family improved a great deal. While the production of metal-using consumer appliances was virtually eliminated after purchases of furniture and other types of consumer durable goods increased Not only did per capita consumption of most goods and services rise during the war but the output of the American economy was more broadly distributed among all segments of the population. Depressed areas practically disappeared and migration from regions of lower productivity and lower employment helped to raise the living standards of the neediest groups. Economic opportunities for the underprivileged were enlarged Vastly expanded employment opportunities allowed the number of persons contributing to family income to increase thus helping to raise the income of many families at the lower end of the income scale Between and there was a marked improvement in the relative status of the lower income segments of the population particularly families of two or more. As shown in table the average income of the two fifths of families ( excluding single person households ) at the bottom of the income scale increased by nearly percent from to after allowance for price changes. This compares with a percent increase for all income groups and an increase of percent for the top fifth of families. Rationing was a further factor improving the ability of the lower income groups to compete for consumption goods during the war period TABLE Changes in the distribution of family income before taxes to * Families and single persons Families ranked from lowest to highest income Percentage of total money income All families. Lowest fifth Second fifth Thirdfifth. Fourth fifth Top fifth. Families of two or more Percentage of total money income Average money income Percentage ( first half of prices ) increase in income to $ $ * Includes family allowances and pay of armed forces living at home Sources : Council of Economic Advisers ( ) and National Bureau of Economic Research ( ) Consumption in the postwar period The standard of living is largely determined by the current flow of nondurable goods and services and the stock of housing and durable equipment In the postwar period it has been raised largely through an increased flow of services and large additions to the supply of homes automobiles and household appliances. ( See chart ) The per capita consumption of nondurable goods apparently reached a peak in CHART PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES 1st HALF OF PRICES Real per capita consumption rose throughout most of the war and postwar period. In it was nearly one-third higher than in DOLLARS DOLLARS $ ' ^ V-v : $ v ' V ; vv ; </ w $ & ' ' ' " '- ^ ' 'VC 'i V ; // ; " ' : \ ; ; " ' # ; " >V <. ' -' ' 3f t ~ & \ f ' : ^ > : ' >Y'/ ' ; \ " \ ; 'vl ? : ; ? ; o'V ! ; " ^ '- * ; : > ^ : ' ^ : ' ^ ; '- ^ ; % i f>j i ^ $ * $ ^ DOLLARS S3 ; ' : ; \ ; 1j ? S : Sf ; * * : 'Hr- c fl l ; ; ; : ' ) 'i \ S : i'' ' ^ ' ^ > ' % > ''lx * V>t > : 'f ^ ^ ' ; * i ' JlS '- " V ; " y ; >v = >K1 &i ? ^ ; ^ ; >i ^ fe * ^ -y ; ' " " * ' * ' ; V.t ' C ' ^ rr : " t ^ ,'/ ~ ' ft S ? : \ H \ y } " /&' ' ? : % ^ " SK t<i ? i ; : i ' ^ ' 'Vyp ^ % st- ' ^ -'A ; ^ L ' H } ^ 'V : P ! ',- * ' N Hi 'iH c i ^ Sc f ^ J ^ ^ % & * " t % ^ ^ v ^ i \ f.> " % _ ; 'C>/ " DOLLARS ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ " " " PER CAPITA EXPENDITURES FOR DURABLE GOODS AND SERVICES K | sp * ' ; ; ^ 3> : t ; | ^ c ^ % ^ ^ } ^ ' ^ f i ^ v '/l ^ lr ^ ff>- ' ' ^ CV ' = ^ '2 ? ^ P k/ ^ ; ' /v ' ' * H " V-f H " ^ ; w IS < ? S ' A>i ' ' " ; > ! / ' " '- : t ; | f ' * v * * * ' / ^ J ? s Ky >4 : ^ C s ^ ' V '' ' 'V ^ V'- * ^ " ,v 'K ' ; x,'/ ; ' \ ' \ ; ; ' S >>'> ' y S v4 \ c'x ^ ; vr / ; > : ' '4 : v ; j '/K .V ; .V- TOTAL PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION FXPFwniTURFS ^ X * * * * ^ NONOURABLE GOODS " " ~ ' " " " ><r> DURABLE GOODS V ^ ^ " ^ ^ \ V \ O * ' | | PER CAPITA EXPENDITURES FOR NONDURABLE GOODS AND FOOD i I I SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS and has since declined somewhat although it is doubtful whether the estimates fully reflect the degree of product improvement which has occurred since the war. On the other hand the per capita consumption of services has moved steadily upward since as it did during World War II. ( See chart ) The average rate of construction of new nonfarm dwelling units was only about units annually during the period to including many of temporary types and the production of automobiles and other major appliances was severely restricted. Thus at the end of the war there was an urgent need for new housing and improvement of existing housing ; a high percentage of automobiles on the road were near the end of their useful life ; and stocks of other appliances were being depleted. Notable progress has since been made in remedying these deficiencies. In only percent of families were living doubled up with other families compared with percent in and percent in Automobile ownership has significantly expanded. In there was a car for every persons ; by the end of the war there was only one car for every persons ; at present there are about persons per car. Twenty-eight million homes had washing machines at the beginning of this year compared with only ^ million in ; and the number of homes with electric refrigerators has almost tripled. Most homes now have a radio and almost one in four has television The more nearly equal distribution of income which was attained during the war has been largely preserved during the postwar period. Although statistics on the distribution of income are not entirely comparable for the prewar war and postwar periods the evidence is fairly clear that the postwar distribution is less concentrated than the prewar distribution. Approximate stability in the distribution of income since is indicated by both of the main bodies of available data the Census Bureau 's Current Population Reports on Consumer Income and the Federal Reserve Board 's Surveys of Consumer Finances. The distribution of income for postwar years is shown in table TABLE Distribution of income in the postwar period Percentage of total morley income All farpjly units Lowest fifth Second fifth Third fifth Fourth Top fifth fifth Includes * H H H single-person families Preliminary Sources : Survey of Consumer Finances Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( ) and Council of Economic Advisers based on data from Bureau of the Census ( ) .._ ' " ' CHART PRODUCTION OF SELECTED CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS Cutbacks in civilian production of percent from first half of I960 rates would permit passenger car output of almost million units per year and household appliance production near levels MILLIONS OF UNITS MILLIONS OF UNITS ELECTRIC WASHERS ELECTRIC REFRIGERATORS [ ELECTRIC AND GAS RANGES 1st 2nd Half ^ / SOURCES : AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURERS'ASSOCIATION MCGRAW-HILL PUBLISHING COMPANY AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Consumption during the period of the new defense build-up If the production goals outlined in previous sections are realized there will still be opportunity for further increases in some types of output for consumers during the next year or two. The output of many types of nondurable consumer goods and services can be expanded while the production of housing and of durable goods is expected to be sufficient to take care of the population growth and some replacement. Exact estimates of the degree of expansion which will take place in the output of nondurable goods or of curtailments in durable goods are of course impossible. In the first place projections included here assume that targets for defense production will be met although many factors may accelerate or retard progress toward these targets. Secondly the extent to which total output can be increased depends on the willingness of more people to enter the labor force ; on willingness to work longer hours ; and on some unforeseeable factors such as the influence of weather conditions on crops and the availability of imported raw materials. Further it is impossible to anticipate in detail the policy decisions which will distribute the burden of necessary cuts among consumption private investment exports and public programs Making such assumptions as seem reasonable for all these factors it appears that per capita consumption of food can be maintained at levels as high or higher than in as can consumption of clothing shoes and other nondurable goods. The output of many types of services can be substantially increased as during World War II. On the whole it seems likely that increased demands for nondurable goods and services will draw forth moderate increases in output despite the diversion of material and manpower to defense industries. Those types of consumer output which will be adversely affected by the resource needs of the security programs are housing and consumer durable goods including automobiles household appliances and television and radio sets Credit restrictions on new housing have been established with the object of reducing construction to an annual rate of nonfarm dwelling units ( a level which may be substantially exceeded in because of the backlog of commitments existing at the beginning of the year ) The new units would provide dwellings for the expected to increase in new families each year with a substantial margin for retirement of substandard units abnormal demands in defense areas and other needs. Thus while additions to housing may not always be of the most desirable types from the standpoint of meeting the needs of a defense economy the quantity of new housing together with improvement of existing structures insures that housing accommodations will not deteriorate during the period of defense build-up However more attention needs to be concentrated not only upon proper location but also upon proper pricing relative to the need. Much more of the housing should be built to sell or rent within the means of defense workers. This involves among other things a larger volume of low-rent publicly financed housing The outlook for metal supplies indicates that the needs of defense procurement and essential investment will not require by the end of this year a greater reduction in the use of scarce metals in consumer durable goods than to percent measured against the first half of After adjustment for the effects of the Chrysler strike in early a cut of this order would permit the production of passenger cars at an annual rate of ^ to million units compared with an estimated 5J/2 million this year million in and million in The effect of cuts in the supply of metals for major items of household equipment ranging from to percent of the first half of rate is shown in chart The estimates are largely illustrative since numerous factors could influence actual production levels in addition to the current allocation of materials. However it can be seen that a percent cutback would permit output near the levels of for electric refrigerators electric and gas ranges and electric washers. In terms of experience prior to this is a very high level of production. Maintenance of supplies at these levels would be more than adequate to equip new dwellings and to permit normal retirements of over-age units In summary the output of consumer goods will be adequate to maintain high consumption levels in the United States under present defense programs but at the cost of a greater labor effort and some sacrifice of leisure time. Consumers will not however be able to translate all of their increases in money income into additional consumption. Some goods will be produced in quantities inadequate to meet demand and some degree of quality deterioration may take place. The variety and attractiveness of some goods will suffer as substitutes are used and skilled labor becomes more scarce For most families only some inconvenience is involved in meeting our national objectives. For others however there will be real hardship Even in normal times many groups of the population hardly participate in what we like to regard as the American standard of living. In as shown in table percent of the families had incomes below $ after taxes and an additional percent had incomes between $ and $ after taxes. While these income groups contain relatively large proportions of single-person families and of farm families with non-money income it is obvious that very large groups still live in relative poverty TABLE Distribution of families by income level before and after Federal income tax * After tax Before tax Money income Percentage Percentage Percentage Percentage money of families of money of families ofincome income All families Under $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over * > -_ J Families include single-person families. Income tax liabilities have been estimated from data on family income and composition NOTE. Detail may not add to totals due to rounding. Figures in this table are not comparable with those shown in table page which are based on a distribution by spending units rather than family units Source : Survey of Consumer Finances Board of Governors of the Federal Keserve System Some of the poorer groups of the population have already benefited by the defense effort. The competition for labor will create better employment opportunities and in some families working wives will augment the family income in the coming period. The defense effort properly gives relatively more income to those who can work longer hours or take jobs in higher-paying defense industries. Changes in income distribution are inevitable in a time of economic readjustment On the other hand a spiraling process of general price and wage increases entails a general redistribution of earning power which can not be justified by the need to get out more production or to change its composition This process leaves behind those groups who are not in a position to take jobs or to obtain wage increases such as retired persons annuitants disabled veterans depending on pensions and all other fixed income groups This is particularly unfortunate because fixed income recipients are disproportionately concentrated in the lower income brackets. Between early and early when personal income rose by about percent half the population did not obtain any increase in income. In fact percent had decreases in income These considerations point to the need for a firm policy of price and wage stabilization. But the fact that there are difficult problems involved in distributing the burdens of a defense program does not by any means imply that much greater cuts could not be made in civilian output than are now contemplated. Durable consumer goods production could be cut to a minor fraction of its present rate and the output of nondurable goods and services reduced substantially without damage to health or morale if the international situation required. By contrast the degree of sacrifice associated with our present objectives appears relatively minor III. Economic Policies for Defense PRIME IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMIC PROGRAMMING In the Council 's December Annual Report to the President entitled " The Economics of National Defense " and in its January Annual Economic Review the need for programming of requirements and supplies was emphasized. Although substantial progress has since been made by the defense agencies toward this programming operation the Council feels called upon once again to emphasize its vital importance " Programming " as we use the term does not mean the central planning characteristic of the economic operations of some other countries. It means simply that in a defense emergency the Government is necessarily affecting the whole economy in so many important ways that it has the high responsibility to see to it that these various operations are harmonious and guided by a vigilant logic Such a programming operation involves four main tasks First of all it involves the application of an economic strategy which fits together insofar as feasible the various major parts of the national effort The military build-up the stockpiling effort the measures for international aid the actions to build up our own industrial facilities and the steps designed to limit civilian consumption do not exist in separate worlds They must all be conducted at the same time within the American economy and in the aggregate they are limited and conditioned by our economic resources. Thus there must be a continuing effort to keep these various major parts of the effort in balance although the relative size of these different parts may vary from time to time depending upon the working hypothesis as to whether we are engaged in a long drawn out struggle or moving quickly toward an ultimate crisis. This first phase of the programming operation might be called the clear defining of major goals and the testing of their feasibility one against the other Second the programming operation involves a continuing determination of how these major goals are to be reached. What part can be accomplished through expanding supplies ? What part needs to be accomplished through reducing demand ? In this aspect programming involves the constant testing of various economic policies and detailed actions in terms of the basic objectives which they are designed to achieve This aspect of programing involves both production and stabilization The two are interconnected and success in both is essential for success in either. In one sense the ultimate aim is production. The products of industry not their price tags fill the armories and commissaries of our Armed Forces. Yet in large measure the stability of the price and income structures conditions the will and capacity to produce. Without stability production is disrupted and serious incentive-sapping inequities crop up It is just as true particularly for a protracted effort that genuine stabilization requires expanding production. Stabilization means holding demand as closely as feasible to the supply of available goods and this can be done more easily if the supply increases While production and stabilization efforts are complementary there can be some points of conflict between them. If production were the only objective we might make extensive use of price and wage increases as incentives but this would destroy stabilization. Conversely rigid and singleminded price and wage stabilization or tax and credit programs directed exclusively to a narrow anti-inflation objective might cripple essential defense and civilian production. The harmonizing of production and stabilization is part of the programming task Third programming involves scheduling and timing. Not only must the major goals be defined with such clarity as is attainable but in addition the relative speed at which these various major goals are to be attained must be borne in mind. Otherwise vast and unnecessary dislocations in production and employment could be caused by cutting back on some things faster than others are increased ; or damage to the defense effort could result from not cutting back on some things fast enough to satisfy military and related requirements Fourth programming involves a reasonably complete and continuous synthesis or inventory at one central point of all the important facts about the progress of the whole effort so that those concerned with policy may have immediate access to what is happening as a guide to what needs to be done. Without this opportunity to look at the whole picture as it evolves great disparities or deficiencies could arise without being detected in advance Programming in short is nothing more nor less than the application of sound and tested business methods to the business of national defense which is the biggest business that we are now undertaking and by far the most vital. The progress thus far made in programming while encouraging should be carried further. And because it is at the core of the whole effort energy and determination should be concentrated upon it even more than upon important segmental operations of production or stabilization For in the final analysis production and stabilization actions must be guided by this kind of programming While the Government must lead in this programming effort its success depends very heavily as the Council has frequently said upon voluntary cooperation. The detailed measures to increase production to control prices and wages to restrain credit and to stimulate saving can be greatly facilitated through the constructive cooperation of unions farm organizations business and consumer groups and local governments. Such cooperation may best be achieved if each group has an opportunity to participate in the programming action which gives meaning and direction to all of these other efforts THE PRODUCTION EFFORT A year ago the nation 's security program was absorbing about percent of the economy 's total production. Under present plans the figure is expected to approach percent a year hence. This assumes that total production which has increased percent during the past year can be increased at least another percent during the coming year. The increase in total production from the first half of to the first half of has made it possible to increase outlays for national security for facilities expansion and for civilian consumption all at the same time Without such an increase in total production it would have been necessary to curtail business investment and consumption by about one-tenth from the present level. A further curtailment of one-tenth would be necessary if the scheduled increases in national security programs during the next year had to be met without a further increase in production. A rise of percent in total output over the next year should make it possible not only to meet the scheduled billion dollars increase in national security expenditures during the next year but also to add to capacity in at least some of the most essential industries and to avoid a reduction in consumption To meet the national security objectives it is essential that the goals outlined in Part II of this Report be attained and that economic programs and policies be shaped to this purpose. These goals may be summarized as follows : An increase in total output of percent or better from the middle of to the middle of An increase of something like percent in total man-hours of work over this period. Most of this increase should result from expansion of the labor force by l/ to million. Some lengthening of the workweek will be necessary in some industries. Increased labor productivity should make an additional contribution of some percent to expansion of total output Expansion of productive capacity in such basic industries as iron and steel aluminum chemicals fuels energy and transportation facilities requiring outlays of to billion dollars during the next years. In addition expansion of specialized facilities for military production will come to about billion dollars Effective development and utilization ot foreign as well as domestic resources of basic raw materials and their allocation in line with comparative urgency of demand Restrictions on many types of consumption business investment and Government spending Industrial production aids To promote the acceleration and redirection of production the Government has in the past year under the authority of the Defense Production Act and related legislation taken action to guide the flow of materials ; to aid some producers in financing their expansions of both working capital and fixed investment ; to reduce the risks and enhance the prospective level and stability of earnings of some producers ; to promote the wider and prompter adoption of new technology ; and to broaden the participation in defense-related production by business enterprises both large and small Some of the production aids are being applied abroad as well as at home to enable friendly nations to increase their contribution to the common cause Materials controls. The most common limiting obstacle to production has been the relatively scarce supply of certain materials mainly metals This will continue and control of materials flow is increasingly the key to the redirection of production In the initial year of the defense effort while the drain on materials for national security was still small a series of partial controls over key materials was instituted. They began with a limitation on accumulation of inventories. This was quickly followed by the granting of a general priority for defense production orders later supplemented by grants of specific limited priority assistance to certain defense-supporting production and capacity-expansion programs. At the same time the use of certain scarce materials such as aluminum in less essential products was curtailed by restriction orders. Conservation of scarce materials and the use of substitutes were promoted by controls over product specifications ( e. g. for containers ) Some uses of scarce materials were prohibited outright and a few materials in shortest supply were placed under complete allocation The National Production Authority has been able to stave off a repetition of the breakdown of the priority system which occurred during World War II. To meet the increasing stringency of materials supplies it is now achieving a transition to the comprehensive allocation and scheduling of key metals use through the Controlled Materials Plan Department of Defense programs for facilities expansion. A basic problem in this area of production is expansion of capacity since the aim is to provide a wide enough margin to permit a quick step-up in the event of all-out war. A core policy underlying defense procurement is to balance deliveries of end items with needs for equipping the active forces for the initial phases of mobilization. Preparation for possible full mobilization requirements is to take the form of quickly expansible production rather than large reserve stocks of military end items. The Department of Defense is now carrying out a facilities expansion program involving primarily the purchase conversion and modernization of production equipment in both privately-operated and Government-operated industrial plants. Funds are generally authorized only when privately-financed expansion can not be obtained even with one or more of the Federal aids provided in the Defense Production Act and the Revenue Act of Steps have been taken to meet the particular administrative issues and subsequent settlements posed by this program. Problems arise particularly where Government-owned and privately-owned equipment and structures are locally integrated in such a way as to make severance impracticable. During World War II numerous additions to privatelyowned facilities which were financed by the services proved to be relatively useless in the postwar period. The inevitable result was that when the supply contracts were terminated the Government faced the problem of disposal with no bargaining position. The only feasible prospective purchaser was the owner of the facility and the cost of dismantling exceeded the best obtainable offer to purchase These problems will not be as serious under the present defense program as during and after World War II. Nevertheless to protect the Government 's irrterest and bargaining power more adequately the Department of Defense has adopted a new policy on facilities contracts. Nonseverable facilities of such a nature as not to be disposable to third parties must in general be located on Government-owned or Government-controlled land except where ( ) the contractor agrees to purchase the facilities on expiration of the contract at actual depreciated cost or ( ) the estimated useful life of the facilities will not extend beyond the expiration of the contract Financial assistance through loan guarantees and direct loans. The program for loan guarantees by Government procurement agencies administered through the Federal Reserve System under authority of the Defense Production Act is designed primarily to aid producers otherwise hampered by lack of working capital. Where aid is required for the financing of fixed investment or developmental work the Defense Production Act also authorizes direct Government loans ( including participation in and guarantee of private bank loans ) The amount of financial assistance extended under these programs is shown in table About three-fourths of the total direct loan assistance including participation by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation has gone to expansion of the production and initial processing of basic materials IQI TABLE Summary of tax amortization necessity certificates and direct loans and loan guarantees under Defense Production Act by type of production through June [ Millions of dollars ] Certificates of necessity for tax amortization Type of production Total Basic materials production and fabrication total Iron and steel Chemicals Petroleum products Pulp and paper Nonferrous ore mining ._ Iron ore mining Coal and coke Refractories __ Textiles Cement and concrete products Other Finished products total Aircraft Machinery and components Electric and electronic equipment Ordnance tanks guns and ammunition Automotive and tractor equipment and components Other Transportation and storage _. Public utilities Miscellaneous Proposed investment Direct loans Percentage ( including Loan guarratio of suppleantees Tax amor- tax amormental tization tization RFC parallowed allowed to ticipation ) proposed investment ) ( J ) ( ) i i ( I ' Not available Less than $ NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Data for necessity certificates and direct loans are cumulative through June ; the loan guarantee figure is cumulative through June Source : Defense Production Administration and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The Reconstruction Finance Corporation under its own authority has also made additional loans of about million dollars during the months ending June to aid the expansion of defense production facilities These are not included in table Encouragement of supply through purchase contracts. Government procurement contracts are being used to promote the expansion of production in three different ways First the negotiation of a long-term contract providing some protection against the risk of market collapse is an important aid to expanded production applicable primarily in the case of staple raw materials which can be stored. Such contracts have been used in procurement for the strategic stockpile here and abroad and under the Defense Production Act have also been extended to the purchase of materials for direct use in production. A somewhat similar principle underlies the Government program of pool orders for machine tools which is designed to secure the fullest utilization of tool-making capacity by encouraging subcontracting and more efficient scheduling of output Second procurement contracts may under the Defense Production Act properly make provision for Government payment of part or all of the costs of developmental or research work or facilities expansion necessary for the fulfillment of the contract Third the placing of procurement contracts can be an important aid to the expansion of production by enlisting the resources of small or new producers who otherwise might be left idle and unproductive. In this way the necessity of devoting scarce resources to costly and time-consuming facilities expansion can be reduced. This is discussed more fully in a later section on small-business aspects of production aids Tax amortization. The most important and most broadly applied aid to facilities expansion in the current mobilization effort is the granting of certificates of necessity under the Revenue Act of which permit a producer to charge off for tax purposes part or all of the cost of certified new production facilities over a 5-year period. Table gives a summary of the operations of this program At the outset of the mobilization program speed was of the essence and certificates of necessity were granted with the objective of getting the expansion of needed facilities under way as rapidly as possible. At the present time a careful review and reappraisal of the program is being undertaken in the light of expansion progress and goals The tax amortization program is designed to provide where necessary an incentive to proceed rapidly with facilities expansion and conversion required in our industrial build-up. It offers the producer earlier recovery of his investment thus providing some protection against unusual uncertainty regarding the economic life of the new facilities. The certificate holder gets a substantial reduction in income and excess-profits tax liabilities during the initial years. This helps him not only because some tax liabilities are deferred thus improving his short-term financial position and credit-worthiness but also because some of the deferred taxes may never have to be paid at all in the event that tax rates are lower after the initial years or in the event that the taxpayer 's earnings position puts him in a lower tax bracket in that later period Wear and tear and obsolescence of facilities represent of course a genuine element of capital cost which is properly recognized in determining fair prices in the negotiation and renegotiation of procurement contracts Under present circumstances such costs may be abnormally high in the case of special-purpose facilities needed for peak military output. These price determinations should be made separately from the granting of amortization for tax purposes In view of the varying degrees of necessity for assistance a wide latitude for administrative discretion in operating this program is essential. The 5-year write-off privilege has in nearly all cases been allowed on only a part of the new investment varying according to type of facilities as shown in table The issue of a certificate of necessity in itself has not been recognized by the Economic Stabilization Agency as establishing an allowable amortization cost factor in the adjustment of price ceilings The direct cost of the program to the Government including tax revenue foregone and in some cases higher prices paid on procurement items is only a fraction of the amount of the certificates issued. A possible offset to these direct costs arises to the extent that total investment and taxable incomes are increased by the tax amortization program Regardless of the ultimate effect of the program on tax collections the important thing is to assure that it will play its proper role in relation to alternative devices and that it be so administered as to make the Government 's contribution as effective and economical as possible No one is in a position to say how much of the investment receiving this type of aid would have taken place in the absence of the necessity-certificate program. It seems reasonably evident however that the use of certificates has been of important assistance in expediting investment in the desired lines. This conclusion is based partly on scattered statements of producers to the effect that their expansion projects have been contingent on this assistance. In part it is based on the rate of plant and equipment investment since the program was authorized Choice of alternative production aids. Proper use of the various available devices for stimulating high-priority investment calls for expert and objective judgment. The best means of assistance to use in a given case is not necessarily the one preferred by the applicant nor the one found administratively most convenient. It is important to minimize the ultimate public cost involved and to tailor the assistance given in individual cases insofar as feasible to the factors actually limiting the ability and willingness of business to expand. Although it may be appropriate in some cases to grant both tax amortization and additional assistance in other forms such as direct loans the tax amortization privilege is not properly to be regarded as a badge of preferred status to be given on a blanket basis or as a prerequisite to other assistance. In many cases the promotion of expansion is more properly left to alternative devices. In the case of long-lived facilities of normal peacetime types where presumptive usefulness does not depend directly on the operation of a high-gear defense program long-term Government loans or loan guarantees often provide sufficient aid and incentive These devices provide financial aid where necessary while also providing for ultimate full recovery of principal and interest. In another category of cases the chief deterrent to adequate expansion is uncertainty as to longrun prices and markets although the product is a staple and durable mate- rial. Many cases in this category involve production of commodities bought by the Government for stockpile and other defense purposes and this introduces an important factor of uncertainty into market prospects. In such cases long-term purchase commitments are an appropriate device for the stimulation of the necessary investment The alternative to private investment with Government aid is construction of industrial facilities by the Government. While this plan was extensively used in World War II it is less extensively needed now because the emergency is less acute and because business is now in far better position to do the preponderance of the necessary expansion job. Nonetheless public authority to construct certain industrial facilities subject to appropriate safeguards is a highly desirable reserve power. When uncertainty as to the utilization of the expanded facilities after the emergency is extreme the cost of inducing private construction may be too great. In some other instances private assent to undertake the job may not be attainable with sufficient speed no matter what the available inducement There may also be some cases where the inducement to private construction may cost the Government far less if the reserve power to proceed by other methods is available Technological assistance and conservation of materials. Coupled with assistance on the market and financial side there is need for increasingly active pursuit of technological development and materials conservation The search is being intensified for new industrial techniques which will save scarce materials vital to defense by utilizing them more carefully or by substituting more plentiful materials for them or which will develop new sources of supply. In other instances new processes or products will have similar beneficial results. For example the minerals development program is being carried forward vigorously in the hope of discovering new ore sources and new metallurgical processes which would enable lower grade ores to be utilized Research and experimental programs for instance in synthetic liquid fuels in the use of lower grade woods or in more efficient processes in the steel industry whether carried on under public or private auspices should not be slackened for they may result in large savings of relatively scarce materials. All such Government programs to the degree feasible are being redirected toward defense needs particularly for the long pull in which increasing shortages of many critical minerals metals and other items including some agricultural items threaten to limit our security and economic growth. This is true of such programs as those of the Bureau of Mines the Bureau of Standards and the Agricultural Research Administration. Certain programs intimately connected with defense may properly be financed by defense appropriations Perhaps more significant for the short run and also of great importance for the longer period ahead is the further application of direct materials conservation measures. Specific limitations have already been placed on the use of such scarce items as tin for containers. Percentage cutbacks in the permitted use of various scarce metals have stimulated substitution and other forms of conservation The interagency Conservation Coordinating Committee has taken steps to encourage conservation of critical materials and to relieve pressure on inadequate plant facilities through standardization simplification and substitution. The program for conservation in construction which includes dimensional coordination standardization of structural elements and gradual unification of building codes can result in substantial savings of materials and labor now going into construction. Projects to provide substitutes and conserve the use of scarce materials are well advanced. Promising community-wide conservation activities in industrial plants are being sponsored and individual companies are furthering this kind of work in their own plants Similar conservation activities in World War II brought substantial savings in scarce materials equipment and inventories. After the war however many practices involving standardization and other forms of materials conservation were dropped. The chance for recapturing and extending these gains now exists and can be accomplished by means of energetic cooperation between industry and Government During World War II the Office of Production Research and Development helped greatly by directing and coordinating scientific and engineering research to strengthen war production making fullest use of existing research facilities. The solution of numerous critical technical production problems including those involving substitute materials or new processes or products was hastened by this service Preoccupation with immediate defense requirements should not cause us to overlook longer range requirements. This is especially true of natural resources development policies and programs necessary for maintenance and expansion of a strong enduring resource base. The Materials Policy Commission appointed by the President last January is giving careful study to the national and international aspects of these problems. In particular basic data investigation and survey programs should be sustained as a basis for future resources development Small business participation in production. The many thousands of smaller producing enterprises furnish a substantial part of total output and have an even more than commensurate importance in terms of the preservation of competitive opportunity and individual initiative. In a situation which calls for the fullest practicable utilization of our resources it is essential that the small business sector of the economy be encouraged to make its full contribution The firm policy underlying military procurement is that qualified small business concerns must be given an opportunity to participate in military procurement and to find a proper place either at the prime contract level or at the subcontract level whichever enables them to make their best contribution to the defense effort Many of the major items of military equipment such as aircraft tanks heavy guns and aircraft carriers can not possibly be supplied directly by small manufacturers although small business concerns can and do make many of the parts going into such equipment. While small business firms have received only about percent of military prime contracts they have received about percent of the contracts for those items which small business can produce. The extent of subcontracting to small firms is indicated by a recent study of Air Force prime contracts which showed that percent of the resulting subcontracts went to such concerns At best however the shift to a defense economy tends to make the competitive position of small firms more difficult. Items of military procurement are generally required quickly and in large quantities which gives an advantage to the larger and better known suppliers. Small firms generally are also less well equipped to finance expanded production and to formulate and present applications for Government assistance in such expansion Moreover when materials become scarce the small firm is often at a disadvantage in retaining its sources of supply or finding others Another important factor often overlooked is that the types of industry which expand most in a mobilization phase are characterized by relatively large business units. The present pattern of expansion consequently offers less opportunity to small business than would arise from a uniform acrossthe-board expansion of all types of output. This point is evidenced by table which brings out the lesser relative importance of smaller firms in those types of manufacturing which predominate in the defense build-up TABLE Importance of small business in selected defense-related industries Percentage of total employees working in firms with fewer than employees March Industry All manufacturing industries Machinery ( except electrical ) _ Chemicals and allied products Primary metal industries _ _ __ Electrical machinery equipment and supplies Products of petroleum and coal __ Ordnance and accessories Transportation equipment _ __ _ _ ._ Employees include those with taxable wages under the old-age and survivors ' insurance program for fanuary-March Source : Federal Security Agency It should be noted that the figures in table measure the relative importance of smaller firms in terms of employment. In terms of amounts of capital invested these same smaller firms represented considerably lower percentages of the respective industry totals The above considerations partly explain why3 even with legislation and policies directed to promotion of small business participation larger firms have received the preponderance of the direct Government orders and assistance. For example the manufacturing firms with fewer than employees had received only about one-fifth of the amount of prime military procurement contracts as noted above and about one-ninth of the amount of certified tax amortization. Allowance should be made for the fact that much of the defense work of small business is done on subcontracts Government policy in assisting small business involves administrative action on many fronts procurement placement materials allocation financing and technical and informational services Definite steps have been taken by the Defense Production Administration to insure greater participation by small business in the prime contract and subcontract awards. An Executive Committee for Small Business has been organized to develop procurement policies which will form the basis of instructions to the contracting officers in the field. The development of regional offices in the National Production Authority for the purpose of working with contracting officers in the field is expected to aid small business in obtaining both prime contracts and subcontracts. The procurement agencies have also taken definite steps to bring qualified small business producers into the defense effort. These steps include : placing small business specialists in procurement offices to find and put into use small firms ' facilities ; development of procurement procedures to encourage prime contractors to subcontract to small firms as much as possible ; and dissemination of information to small firms as well as others concerning Government needs and the manner in which both prime and subcontract business can be obtained In the administration of materials controls a special effort is being made to counteract the handicaps facing small firms. In general small-quantity requests for controlled materials are processed earlier and approved for a larger percentage of the amounts requested than the large-quantity applications. Priorities and allocations to warehouse distributors have also helped to maintain a flow of materials to the small producers who depend on such distributors Probably the most important help to small business in the present situation is the activity of business itself and of local and regional development groups in mobilizing information on small business resources and opportunities. In many areas this type of private initiative is showing notable results in aiding Government agencies to broaden the base of the defense production effort and to avoid unnecessary dislocations of employment Defense production aids and regional development The requirements of speed and long range security in the defense mobilization mean that customary economic factors governing the location of productive facilities have to be modified in certain cases. As was pointed out in the Council 's Review of months ago two general types of dispersion appear desirable : the avoidance of over-concentration of industrial facilities within individual industrial and labor market areas and the regional decentralization which looks toward the further development of cores of economic strength in the less developed regions Federal aids for the expansion of industrial facilities and also the awarding of defense contracts and subcontracts3 are important instruments for guiding the location of new facilities as well as related manpower and services Table compares for the major regions of the country the impact of the defense program as indicated by approved tax amortization certificates and military prime contracts with the regional distribution of industrial activities in TABLE Regional impact of the defense program compared to regional economic activities in [ Percentages of United States totals ] Region Tax amorti- Expenditures zation cerfor new tificates applant and proved as of equipment May in _ United States New England Middle Atlantic East North Central West North Central South Atlantic East South Central West South Central Mountain Pacific Military prime con- Value added by manutracts July facture in 1950-March i Excludes small and certain other kinds of contracts. Contracts usually cite address of contractor 's main office which may not be located in the same region in which the work will actually be done Moreover a considerable but unknown portion of prime contracts are subcontracted out to firms which may be located in other regions. Therefore the above data should be used with greatest care Sources : Department of Commerce and Defense Production Administration To date, no satisfactory means has been found for screening defense plant expansion and defense contracts for their locational desirability. To do this would require that workable standards or criteria be developed against which to judge each particular defense plant or contract decision. Because of the enormous variety of economic and security factors having locational significance any such standards would have to be flexible and at the same time be administratively feasible A checklist of points to be taken into account would include : planned dispersal of industrial facilities and activities for security reasons as determined by the National Security Resources Board the Office of Defense Mobilization the Department of Defense the Federal Civil Defense Administration and other appropriate agencies ; fullest possible utilization of manpower particularly in those areas and categories of skill industry sex or age where under-utilization is prevalent ; maximum utilization of existing and potential natural resources plant and equipment ; extent of disruption to established patterns of living and of housing and community facilities and services ; to the extent possible the solution or amelioration of underlying economic and social problems such as chronic underemployment lack of industrial diversification overcrowding of population and substandard housing ; and of course most important speed and efficiency in getting the needed defense work done. Many defense production facilities and activities do not admit of much choice in location. Those which do however should be located in the light of criteria worked out along the lines suggested above Certain large public developments having both regional and national significance are greatly needed for their contribution to national security and economic growth several years from now. Notable among these is the St. Lawrence seaway and power project which when finished will furnish kilowatts of electric power capacity to be divided equally between Canada and this country and will provide a major water route to Great Lakes ports for the shipment of Labrador iron ore and other items Although this project will not help until it is completed several years from now the decision has to be taken soon if we are to have the power and the iron ore even then when both will be more urgently needed than at the present time The outlook for severe shortage of electric power continues in several parts of the country most seriously in the Pacific Northwest. Beginning of new projects planned and budgeted for this year and now being considered by Congress can not be put off without delaying the time at which ever-increasing demands for power in that region may be met under conditions of adequate reserves It will be necessary also to assure that the construction of necessary power transmission lines be carried on in step with the construction of new generating capacity. In line with traditional public power policy the Federal Government should be in a position to deliver power from its dams to publicly and cooperatively owned utilities to insure that users get electricity at low developmental rates. This means essentially the authority to build transmission lines to load centers and to negotiate suitable contracts for transmission over privately owned lines Aids to agricultural production As Part II of this Review indicated our national security program requires a continuing expansion of total agricultural production with much HO larger increases for some crops than for others. This expansion must be accomplished with a smaller labor force on farms and with shortages of some materials which are essential to farm production and to food processing The farm labor force dropped from million persons in to million in Further decreases are in prospect as farm workers take higher paid jobs in defense industries. With a declining labor force on farms output of agricultural products has been maintained only by the greatly increased use of fertilizers insecticides and pesticides farm machinery electricity and other labor-saving materials and supplies. Still further use of these will be required for additional increases in output. Specifically it is essential to increase nitrogen production capacity substantially and quickly ; to give high priorities to agricultural needs for machinery and spare parts ; to increase substantially the output of insecticides and pesticides ; and to assist farmers to obtain essential labor during peak seasonal needs Rural electrification has helped to increase farm output. The present shortage of copper and power prevents the full development of the rural electrification program. Nevertheless it will be prudent to supply necessary material and power to those projects which are of the greatest importance in increasing farm output We must continue to emphasize conservation and development measures designed to maintain the productivity of our farm land and to increase the yield of crops. Land reclamation projects now nearing completion will add to our farm output. With a heavy demand for lumber and wood pulp we should proceed with the rapid construction of forest access roads especially in the West These efforts are needed to assure a sustained expansion of farm output over a period of several years. The immediate supplies of farm products are adequate. Per capita food supplies in are expected to be slightly larger than those of last year. The current wheat harvest is running better than had been previously expected and according to the July crop report crop prospects are generally good. Meat and other livestock products are in strong demand and some production increases would be desirable. But this would require more feed. Thus the principal immediate problem is that of increasing our supplies of corn and other feeds With good weather a start may be made toward replenishing reserves during the coming year Studies are under way to determine guides for agricultural production in National State and county Agricultural Mobilization Committees are cooperating in this work and will carry on an intensive educational program to inform farmers of these guides and to help them make needed adjustments to keep output and requirements in balance Ill Manpower build-up Comparing the first half of with the first half of the total labor force expanded by about % million. We have nearly reached our armed forces goal and have maintained our civilian labor force near the pre-Korea level. Employment in civilian industry is about million above the pre-Korea average. Unemployment was drawn down from an average of million to million during the first half of To date there has been no evidence of a general manpower shortage. Neither employment nor hours of work have shown significant increases during the past half year During the next half year we should add about million additional workers to our defense production. About million of these would have to be drawn from persons not now in the labor force. Others must become a part of the defense effort through the conversion of civilian goods industries to defense production ; still others must change from their present jobs to industries working on defense orders. Securing these additions and shifts may prove difficult Shortages in scientific and health professions and of workers trained in skills required by some of the defense industries exist and will increase. Thus although it would be inappropriate to recommend now manpower policies for a general manpower shortage it is important to take such actions as are feasible to meet the specialized problems of skill shortages and shortages within particular labor market areas. The situation is particularly critical where both types coincide While we can not afford to be complacent about our manpower resources we should not go to the other extreme of being unduly alarmed about possible future difficulties. We should time our efforts to encourage the entrance of workers into the labor force so that the new entrants will find that jobs are available for them. We should not increase hours indiscriminately without considering whether this would interfere with the very necessary training of additional workers to help in the long-run job of defense production. The Interagency Manpower Committee which advises the Director of Defense Mobilization has issued a statement dealing with problems involved in lengthening the workweek. We must plan our manpower program in such a way that we provide for the needs of the next year and at the same time lay the foundation to meet the contingency of full mobilization if that should become necessary The Council concurs in the view that the manpower program should be voluntary. Compulsion particularly for a long drawn out effort is undesirable Various agencies of the Government are taking action to deal with different aspects of the manpower problem under their usual powers. The Department of Labor has been using its clearance machinery for out-ofarea recruitment with increased frequency. The Department is also en- couraging employers to relax unnecessary hiring specifications on age limits sex experience and physical requirements The Wage Stabilization Board has adopted a policy which recognizes that some wage increases may be necessary in rare and unusual cases to enable employers in essential industries to recruit and maintain an adequate labor force Regional and area labor-management committees established by the Secretary of Labor are expected to play an extremely important role in the labor market areas in which significant defense manpower problems exist or impend advising and assisting community action. The committees offer advice principally on three categories of problems elimination of wasteful turnover ; bringing about the fullest use of local labor supply in a given geographic area in order to minimize immigration of labor and thus reduce the strain on community facilities ; and identifying unused plant capacity and local pools of labor which might be utilized in defense production While these devices have been established to develop manpower policy and to coordinate activities we are still in the " tooling-up " stage. It is necessary now to move forward with a manpower program involving four main measures One important step is the improvement of the present program designed to prevent area labor shortages and to relieve those that have already developed or may develop. On the preventive side the availability of labor supply and of related housing and community facilities and services should be given greater weight in the locating of new defense plants and in the channeling of defense contracts and subcontracts. This should be part of an improved system for taking economic and security locational factors into account. Where the shortages can not be relieved sufficiently by such measures and where additional workers have to be brought in causing overcrowding high turnover and inefficiency generally a program of aid for housing and community facilities and services will prove helpful Recommendations for additional forms of indirect and if necessary direct Federal aid for facilities and services as well as housing have been presented to Congress in the Defense Housing and Community Facilities and Services bill A second step in the manpower program today should be toward further conservation and development of essential professions and skills. Since we are faced with an emergency which may last for many years it obviously is necessary to begin now the education and training of professional and scientific personnel in those physical and social sciences in which the supply will be most seriously short two or more years from now. These include virtually all of the major health professions such as doctors dentists and nurses ; many types of scientists and engineers ; and a growing number of skilled trades particularly in the metalworking and electrical trades. There are also serious shortages of farm labor and elementary school teachers. To meet these problems requires among other things joint action of military and civilian authorities to share the existing supply of key personnel to assure optimum distribution. It requires additional advisory services to employers to help increase the productivity of their workers. It requires also the expansion of the long-term supply of scarce professions and skills through expanded education and training. A program of Federal aid to medical education and nursing training is particularly needed. Efforts to redirect on-the-job training programs and public school vocational education toward defense needs should be intensified. The apprentice training program should also be enlarged The third step should be the development of better statistics to show more clearly the manpower situation both from the demand and the supply sides. This requires more definite and detailed manpower requirements data derived from specific production programs. These data should not only show total needs but also should indicate the type of workers needed the skills which will be required and the location of the need. There is room also for more specific information concerning the number of workers in our economy who are trained in particular skills and the number of persons not presently in the labor force who could become available for work The fourth step is the development of manpower data for the total free world effort and of programs to improve the use of manpower by the cooperating countries. A major contribution could be made to total free world production if greater effort were devoted especially in Western Europe to improving the utilization and productivity of manpower through facilitating the mobility of labor work training and similar measures although the major scope for increasing productivity in many countries lies in improving capital equipment and productive techniques International production and resources policies The problems of production conservation and distribution of goods are not merely problems of the United States economy. They involve the whole free world. The need for an integrated use of free world resources should be a major factor in determining the best course to pursue in many matters which we customarily think of as " domestic. " The raw materials problem. Because the shortage of raw materials is a main factor limiting the growth in output of finished goods in the world today these shortages are one of the most important economic problems facing the free world. The solution of this problem along international lines requires cooperation among the countries of the free world to increase production and availability of materials in short supply and to assure their most effective use. To meet this problem an International Materials Conference was set up early this year consisting of a central group and seven commodity committees concerned with sulfur cotton and cotton linters tungsten and molybdenum manganese nickel and cobalt pulp and paper wool and copper lead and zinc. The countries participating in the Conference account for to percent of the producing and consuming interests of the free world in the commodities concerned. Outside the International Materials Conference the United States has met with other countries to consider problems of the international distribution of tin and rubber These committees have obtained information on past and near-term future production and requirements. They have studied and in some cases already recommended to governments measures for increasing production and conserving supplies. In most cases these measures alone will not suffice to close the gap in supplies. The committees have therefore also undertaken to work out acceptable procedures for equitable distribution of current supplies. Agreement has been reached among the governments concerned on specific third quarter allocations of sulfur tungsten and molybdenum. An emergency allocation of newsprint has also been recommended to meet certain specially urgent needs. With respect to the other commodities allocation measures are still under study. Many problems remain to be solved. There is a tendency for each country to press for allocation of commodities over the supply of which it has no control and to resist allocation of commodities which it does control. The problems of increasing supply limiting consumption and securing equitable international distribution are complex. They involve questions of the treatment of stockpile requirements definition of defense requirements and the impacts upon prices normal trading arrangements and future market positions One of the major factors hindering international agreement is the background of surpluses and relatively low prices of primary materials between the two world wars and a consequent uncertainty on the part of producing countries as to the duration of high demand for these materials. Because of this uncertainty there is some reluctance to accept measures which would reduce the demand for or the prices of these commodities. Similarly there is reluctance to increase production. Some producing countries fear that the expanded output may become surplus after the period of rapid build-up in free world defenses has ended While this lack of confidence in the future demand for raw materials is quite natural in view of the depressed raw materials prices during the interwar decades shortages were appearing in several of the major raw materials even before the current defense program. The period shortly before the Korean outbreak was the first time in a long period that there was any test of the adequacy of the free world 's raw material supplies to support simultaneous high levels of production in all the industrial countries. It should be borne in mind that during the war and early postwar years Europe 's demand for raw materials had been below the levels corresponding to full production and that in after a considerable recovery in Western European and Japanese production there was a temporary slump in United States raw material purchases. With the resumption of the upward trend during the first half of in the United States as well as in Western Europe and Japan there was some evidence that the long term demand-supply situation for some of these commodities is favorable to producers. Expanded production appears necessary to support long-term growth as well as current emergency demands In cases where fear of the future makes producers reluctant to expand production and makes their governments reluctant to take price-restraining action the Council believes that serious consideration should be given to providing producers of selected materials both here and abroad with some form of assurance limiting market declines for restricted periods in the future. During the past two decades our farm price support policies have demonstrated that assurance as to minimum prices can be effective in stimulating increased production. In the present emergency the Government has offered to purchase at a price below the present market all domestically produced tungsten concentrates which can not be sold elsewhere until a specified quantity is obtained or until July whichever occurs first. Besides providing for the needs of future growth the assurance given by devices of this general character may favorably influence the attitudes of other countries in present negotiations We could probably get better price terms during the present defense period if the market risk factor could be taken out of the producers ' price Minimum prices and long-term contracts at reasonable prices stand an excellent chance of providing a good investment for the United States since the goods involved are storable Other measures to further the expansion of world production have been discussed in the Second Quarterly Report of the Director of Defense Mobilization It is clearly not enough to secure increased production of essential imports. It is also necessary to maintain our access to them. During the past half year there have been difficulties in obtaining a number of essential imported commodities owing to the fact that their prices in world markets have risen above domestic price ceilings. In some cases where the material is not an important part of the cost of the goods in which it is used it will be possible to meet the problem by exempting the commodity from price control. In other cases it would be desirable for the Government to purchase imported articles and resell them at domestic ceiling prices. Such purchase and resale operations however require legislative authority and provision of the necessary funds Export control and allocations policy. It was pointed out in Part II of this Review that our security requires that goods be made available to meet certain important foreign as well as domestic uses. In a situation where many goods will be in short supply this requires a mechanism for making goods available for essential exports. At the same time a mechanism is required for restraining less essential exports of scarce goods. The control instruments for restraining and for assisting exports are now available Export controls are exercised under the authority of the Export Control Act of This Act was recently renewed until June The means for providing positive assistance to exports are priorities and allocations exercised under the Defense Production Act of To provide policy guidance for the mechanisms for restraining or assisting exports the Director of Defense Mobilization has recently set forth the general principles which should govern the export or retention of scarce supplies. His statement lays down specific guides without attempting to rate the separate priorities as objectives to be pursued by regulatory agencies in the United States Government. Allocations should be made in such a manner that supplies contribute most to military production and other aspects of mobilization essential civilian requirements in the free world lessened dependence of the free nations upon supplies from the Soviet bloc and prevention of political deterioration in areas essential to the combined strength of the free world After requirements of high essentiality have been met the allocation of remaining supplies should take into account the effects upon the respective civilian economies of the broad contribution which each area or country makes toward common defense including direct military production increased political and economic strength and control of inflation of world prices. Individual countries differ widely in their ability to make such contributions ; the objective should be an equitable distribution of the burdens These principles help carry out the recommendations adopted last winter by the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations and the more detailed agreements reached subsequently by the Foreign Ministers of the American Republics To carry out these principles effectively estimates of essential foreign as well as domestic requirements are needed. Without such estimates production needs can not be properly gauged and the need for curtailing nonessential uses can not be properly evaluated. At present fairly firm estimates of Western European requirements are available largely because of knowledge obtained in the three years of operation of the European Recovery Program. But greater progress is needed in evaluating the specific requirements of other countries to which three-quarters of our exports go This evaluation is in some respects more difficult than in the cases of the Western European countries owing to the fact that less information is available. But this fact increases the need to study such requirements more closely Foreign aid. The ability of the Western European nations to undertake large and rapid expansion of their defense establishments is partly a political question but it has important economic aspects. These arise from the fact that expansion of their defense production besides requiring enlargement of total production will severely limit the goods available for domestic consumption and investment and to some extent their exports. These countries can not build up their stock of military equipment unaided within the time required by their planned increases in troop strength. This is partly because of technical factors relating to the kinds of goods they are equipped to produce but also because the required curtailment of consumption and investment would be too great. The populations of most of these countries have been under constant economic and psychological pressure for more than a decade. Rapid and steady progress had brought recovery within their grasp just at the time when the need for a rapid rebuilding of defenses became clear. In all of these countries the narrow margin of reserve economic strength and in some of them political and social tensions limit the degree to which they can subject themselves to renewed strains without undermining their economic strength or even their political stability In the economically underdeveloped countries there is a serious and chronic deficiency in total production. Their living standards are far lower than those of the industrial countries of the world and in most cases there had been little if any improvement between World War II and the Korean outbreak. Some countries had even suffered a further deterioration of living standards. This situation combined with intensified nationalism and in some cases with problems arising from newly won independence has led to increased tension and political as well as economic instability Our policy regarding aid to other countries should be considered against this background modified by the effects of recent world economic developments In this connection the sharp rise in world prices and demand following the Korean outbreak has had effects of major significance. The rise of raw material prices has been much greater than that of finished goods prices Broadly speaking there has been some redistribution of income from countries which are substantial net importers of raw materials to countries which are substantial net exporters of such materials. In many of the raw material producing countries a great expansion of income has occurred in the export industries. These countries are undergoing an expansion not only of money incomes but also in most cases of real national incomes. The effect of world economic developments in the past year has been to reduce the need for external financial assistance of many of these countries although there are important exceptions notably India. The prospect is that their main concern will be the availability of essential imports rather than the means of paying for them. It should be realized however that a portion of their increased earnings will accrue to foreign owners rather than to the exporting countries themselves ; that the distribution of the remaining benefits as between the underdeveloped countries bears little relation to the relative intensity of their economic needs ; and that the internal inflations .which in some cases are accompanying the large increases in export income may have disruptive and dangerous economic and social effects In countries dependent on imports for a major portion of their raw materials such as most of the Western European countries and Japan the rapid rise of import prices has meant a pushing up of costs. Where export prices have risen less as is typical in these countries it has also substantially offset the effects of increased production on the volume of goods available for domestic use. It will be recalled that when hostilities broke out in Korea production in Western Europe had largely recovered and was increasing in Japan as well although a need for adequate foreign markets still persisted and there continued to be some competitive weakness. The first economic effect of the Korean outbreak and the boom in the United States economic activity was to increase the dollar earnings of many foreign countries including many industrial countries. In some quarters this was taken as an indication that their dollar problems were ended. So far as some of the rearming industrial countries are concerned however the initial improvement in their balance of payments positions is somewhat deceptive as an indication of the fundamental effect of rearmament and the increase in their holdings of gold and dollar assets may be even more so. As was indicated by the Council last January there were reasons for thinking that the improvement in the balance of payments positions of the countries building up their defenses might be temporary. The prices they had to pay for necessary imports were rising more rapidly than their export prices Moreover it seemed clear that when the expansion of their defense production got under way on a large scale it would press hard upon their resources making necessary an increase in the quantity of their imports and limiting their ability to export while at the same time subjecting them to inflationary pressure In the past half year these difficulties have been materializing. The more rapid rise of import than of export prices has been a major factor in widening Western Europe 's trade deficit which had previously been declining steadily from an annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of to more than billion in the first quarter of At the same time various European countries in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization have increased their planned rate of defense expenditures from approximately billion dollars a year prior to Korea to almost billion in and higher spending rates are projected for subsequent periods. Thus the rapid expansion of free world defenses is increasing the demands upon the resources of Western European countries and is again making it difficult for them to meet their essential requirements without outside aid. This is true despite the continuing growth in Western European production Because of the strains of increased defense needs and the political and economic problems they create the President has requested the Congress to authorize and appropriate billion dollars for foreign aid for the fiscal year a much larger sum than would otherwise have been required Of this total billion dollars is intended to finance the procurement of military end-items for shipment abroad and billion is for economic aid in the form of grants. The major portion of both military and economic aid is for Western Europe. A build-up of Western Europe 's defensive strength to the necessary size and with the necessary speed can not be achieved solely through military production in the Western European countries. It requires the shipment of large amounts of military production from the United States. Economic aid is equally necessary. Without it Western Europe would either be unable to build up its own defense production on the scale and in the time required to deter and to resist aggression or would be under severe internal economic pressure which would threaten its stability or its power to sustain a long-run defensive effort. Technical assistance and aid for specific projects to economically underdeveloped countries are necessary to assist in increasing their economic strength. This aid will also have the effect of helping to expand the production of scarce materials needed by the free world. Such aid will be financed partly by grants and partly by Export-Import Bank loans. To permit the Export-Import Bank to perform its role the President has recommended an expansion of its lending authority by billion dollars THE STABILIZATION EFFORT The nature of inflation Stated most simply inflation develops when there is a general excess of demand over supply at current prices. But this statement does not penetrate very deeply into the manner in which inflation is generated or how it affects the economic and social structure. A fundamental feature of the inflationary process is its uneven impact upon prices and incomes. While prices and incomes rise on the average they do not rise uniformly. Many incomes do not rise at all. Those whose incomes outrun the price rise may even benefit from the inflation. But the many millions who are unable to advance their money incomes or who are holding fixed dollar assets are injured. Under some circumstances a moderate rise in the general level of prices and wages stimulates production ; but when resources are being intensively used this stimulus is not likely to be needed. And in a period when a rapid shift toward defense production is required those activities which may be stimulated by such a rise may well be nonessential. Moreover one price or wage increase which may provide a desirable incen- tive often leads to other price and wage increases and initiates an inflationary spiral. Spiraling inflation does not create wealth but only changes its distribution not on the basis of one 's contribution to output but on the basis of one 's strength and bargaining position in the complex of market forces Thus inflation destroys the existing balance among the various groups in our economy. It generates a hectic inter-group scramble to maintain or improve one 's position in which speculation thrives hoarding is encouraged and social strife is stimulated. It creates inequities disorganizes markets disrupts production raises the costs of the security program and impairs the motive to save. Such a process is bad at all times. It is intolerable when the need is to concentrate all energies on national security Since a rise in prices reflects the gap between supply and demand it has been said that price rises are only the result and not a cause of CHART CONSUMER INCOME AND DEMAND AND PRICE INCREASES Consumption in real terms is almost the same as a year ago but because of higher prices the cost of goods and services consumed has increased about percent BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * I/EXPENDITURE DUE TO PRICE INCREASE SINCE 2ND QUARTER I960 SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE * AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS inflation and that it is futile to " suppress " inflation by controlling prices This is a misleading oversimplification. For through the dynamic interaction of prices incomes and spending price increases are not only end results of the inflationary process they are integral moving parts of the inflationary mechanism. A price rise creating the expectation of further price rises stimulates the demand of buyers and thus helps to bring about anticipated price rises. This raises the income of sellers leads to demands for higher wages and thus further stimulates inflationary pressure Properly stated the problem of stabilization policy is to seek out and contain the sources of inflationary pressure wherever they exist. The sources of such pressure usually are diverse. A rise in the ratio of private spending to production available for private buying may result from a diversion of production into national security programs without a commensurate diversion of incomes into higher taxes or savings. Private spending even without an increase in incomes may also result from a reduction of savings out of current income from the spending of past savings or from credit expansion. A rise in incomes in turn may be the consequence of rising prices and then in a secondary movement of the spiral cause further price rises. In shaping and adjusting the stabilization program it is essential that these sources of inflationary pressure be comprehensively identified and their relative importance properly assessed Only by this means can we find the take-hold points for policies adequate and effective in a particular situation Appraisal of prospective inflationary pressures Previously in this Review the Council traced the trends within the economy during the months following the Korean outbreak. It pointed out that while there were two buying waves set off by events in Korea the inflationary trend resulted from demand backed by ability to buy expanding more rapidly than production. As more spendable dollars became available in ratio to the available volume of goods prices rose ; and in turn price increases were among the factors producing further increases in other incomes Comparing the second quarter of with the same quarter of the total wage and salary bill increased by billion dollars. Farm prices and noncorporate business income also rose contributing to an expansion of total personal income of about billion dollars ( all annual rates ) Some of this increase in income was absorbed by taxes partly in consequence of the increase in personal tax rates on October ; but despite these higher rates spendable income after taxes advanced billion dollars or almost percent. ( See appendix table B-9. ) During the same period prices increased partly because of demand in general rising faster than supplies partly because of cost and price raising in anticipation of expected shortages and controls. It is estimated that consumers in the second quarter CHART PRIVATE INVESTMENT AND ITS FINANCING While the rate of real investment expanded by about percent from second quarter of I960 to the second quarter of expenditures in current prices rose by more than one-third BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * TOTAL FUNDS AVAILABLE FOR INVESTMENT * TOTAL GROSS PRIVATE r DOMESTIC INVESTMENT UNDISTRIBUTED CORPORATE PROFITS CAPITAL CONSUMPTION ALLOWANCES- ^ I PHYSICAL INVESTMENT IN 2ND Q U A R T E R PRICES FINANCING FROM PAST INTERNAL SAVING AND EXTERNAL SOURCES 2nd Qtr r d Qtr st Qtr SEASONALLY 2nd Qtr ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ^ INCLUDES INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT AND CAPITAL CONSUMPTION ALLOWANCES ON NONCORPORATE CAPITAL INCLUDING RESIDENCES SOURCE ? DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS of were spending ( at an annual rate ) to billion dollars more on account of the increase in prices since Korea. Allowing for price changes the net effect of the expansion of incomes was to raise consumers ' real buying power by less than percent above the level before Korea. ( See chart and appendix table B-10. ) During the same period as chart shows the increase in business demand for capital goods and for inventory accumulation was a very important factor in the rise in aggregate demand. This business demand also outran supplies and drove up prices. In consequence while the rate of real investment was expanded by about percent the expenditures in current prices rose by one-third At the same time while the national security program expanded rather slowly during its first months the rate of deliveries for the defense program was almost twice as high in the second quarter of as in the first few weeks after Korea. Total public outlays for goods and services were percent higher in real terms but due to price increases were about percent higher in current dollars In appraising the prospect for further inflationary pressures main consideration must be given to likely trends in spending in funds available for spending and in lines of supply ( ) The national security program as now scheduled calls for an increase of defense outlays ( even assuming no further rise in prices ) which would bring the annual rate of spending by the middle of to about billion dollars higher than the present annual rate. In contrast total output is expected to increase by about billion during the same period The Council 's analysis of prospective inflationary pressures is based on the carrying out of this program at presently planned levels ( ) During the second quarter of this year total gross private domestic investment was at an annual rate of billion dollars. Even subtracting the billion dollars which went for inventory accumulation about billion dollars at an annual rate was applied to business and farm construction and equipment and almost billion to residential construction Despite recent and prospective increases in taxes the current and prospective earnings and financial position of most business concerns could support a still higher level of plant and equipment investment and businessmen report plans for such an increase ( ) The expansion of output shown to be desirable and feasible in Part II of this Review will entail increased employment and longer hours. Even under an effective wage and price stabilization program which is assumed in this analysis there will have to be some increases in wage rates to correct inequities to draw workers into defense work and to provide reasonable incentives. The incomes of unincorporated businesses and of self-employed professional people may fluctuate for some time but the level by the middle of is likely to be higher than it is now. Preliminary crop reports indicate that farm production goals envisaging a percent rise in output will be met. Farm income will rise substantially in and is expected to remain at higher levels in Taking all of these components together it is a reasonable though very rough estimate that if defense schedules and essential business investment needs are met the total of personal incomes may expand by to billion dollars ( annual rate ) between now and the middle of next year. Over a sweep of time as long as a year regardless of variations from quarter to quarter it seems extremely likely that such an increase in personal incomes distributed broadly among almost all income groups would translate itself into a desire in the aggregate to spend more money. Even if one-third of the additional income went into taxes and savings and only two-thirds were translated into efforts to spend it there would be an increase in consumers ' ^ ability and desire to spend by about to billion dollars The three main factors of demand which have just been listed must now be measured against the realistic estimate of a possible increase in total production of percent or better during the next months. Such an increase in total production which would amount to about billion dollars compares with a projected increase in security programs of billion dollars. This indicates the need to curtail civilian demand whether for investment or consumption by a considerable amount. Investment could be substantially reduced by a sharp decline in the rate of inventory accumulation. Curtailment of residential construction as well as of nonessential business construction and equipment purchases needs to be continued. With such reductions in investment it should become possible to maintain consumer supply in the aggregate approximately at present levels. Thus it becomes clear that under the impact of the security program there will be a swelling of personal incomes and demand without a commensurate increase in consumer goods supply. This discrepancy will be sufficient to generate and in all probability will generate a renewal of strong inflationary pressures which will require a rounded containment program There may be a wide margin of error in these estimates. While they are based on fundamental aspects of an economy in a state of partial mobilization other circumstances could alter the timing of intermediate events For example the rate of saving is very volatile. If people believe that there will be no serious scarcities and that prices will be held they are likely to refrain from extraordinary buying. Under such circumstances business may wish to liquidate accumulated inventories. In that event the expansion of the security program may be offset or more than offset for a while by a temporary contraction in private demand. If on the other hand some new evidence of international tension should develop another wave of scare buying by consumers and business could put additional pressures on prices No one can appraise all of these variables which might accent a shortrange movement in either direction. But national economic policy should be geared fundamentally to the strong undercurrent of basic factors. These basic factors underscore so heavily the prospect for more inflationary pressures at some time well within the next year that national economic policy should be on guard against this paramount danger The strategy of stabilization The essence of sound stabilization policy in the present period is the integration of a combination of policy instruments. No single line of defense against inflation will do the job. Instead we must have a defense in depth. As a matter of fact at least five major lines of defense against inflation already have been erected and now must be maintained. Given the size of the inflation problem in prospect the battle will not be won at any one of these lines alone. Moreover, strong support of stabilization at any one of them assumes an effective combination of policy instruments The most fundamental cause of inflation we are facing is that a rising defense effort leads to the creation of additional incomes without a corresponding increase in the supply of civilian goods. Therefore the most fundamental approach to economic stabilization consists in an effort to offset some of the rise in incomes by additional taxes. This brings disposable income into closer correspondence with available civilian supply Taxation of corporate profits also is important not only because it is prerequisite for effective wage stabilization but also because it reduces funds for business spending There is however no workable tax program which in itself could qualify as a sufficient anti-inflation policy at the present time. Exclusive reliance on tax increases as a means of checking inflation might call for such drastic increases when Government expenditures were near their peak that work and management incentives might be seriously damaged. Without simultaneous price and wage controls moreover drastic tax increases might be shifted forward to prices or might lead to demands for compensating wage and other income rises. In this case the tax measures would be largely self-defeating Another source of inflationary pressures is additions to purchasing power through the use of credit. The effect of higher taxes in reducing business and consumer spending out of income can be offset in part or more than offset by spending financed with credit. Therefore a policy of credit restraint is a necessary complement of proper tax policy. One approach to credit restraint is by general measures such as open market operations discount rates and reserve requirements designed to restrict the over-all supply and availability of credit and by voluntary credit restraint programs. The effects of such measures however do not discriminate sufficiently between essential and less essential activities. General credit restraint must therefore be supplemented by selective credit regulations applicable to fields where credit practices are standardized such as the financing of consumer goods especially durables residential and commercial construction securities listed on the stock exchanges and commodities traded on futures markets In the case of business spending an effective method of enforcing restraint is the direct control of production of goods available for purchase Limitation orders and allocations of such basic materials are designed primarily to assure that scarce resources are made available to highest priority use. In addition these measures limit business investment for less essential purposes and thereby contribute to economic stabilization In the case of the consumer if tax increases can not be expected to bear the whole burden of closing the income gap then obviously there is an urgent need for doing everything possible to limit the increase in spending out of rising disposable incomes. The fourth line of defense which we must reinforce is that of saving. We seek two things : first to encourage positive saving out of current income ; second to discourage and restrict so-called consumer " dissaving/ ' whether the latter takes the form of expenditures out of past savings or of consumer credit expansion Our final line of defense against inflation consists of price and wage controls. Such controls reinforce the other phases of stabilization strategy already outlined. In the first place both wage and price controls restrain the growth of incomes before taxes thus reducing the job of income absorption through taxation. The continuance of price and wage controls as income-restraining devices was one of the basic assumptions of the foregoing analysis of prospective inflationary pressures. If business prices farm prices and wages were allowed to spiral upward each would add to incomes and each would provide additional impetus for the others It is not possible to estimate the magnitude which such dynamic income generation might attain in any given period since this would depend upon the speed with which the changes interacted. But it is a process which with the present volume of liquid assets in the economy could easily reach dangerous proportions. Only an effective simultaneous policy of price and wage stabilization can give assurance against the creation of such an inflationary spiral arising either from the price or the wage side Thus price and wage controls support the other elements of stabilization strategy. Conversely price and wage controls would be doomed unless taxation credit controls and savings programs hold the inflationary pressure down to manageable proportions. Only if we use a variety of policies in complementary fashion can we hope to do the job which should be done with justice to all of our interrelated objectives Tax policy In a period of defense mobilization taxation is more than a means of financing the necessary expansion of governmental outlays. It is also a positive instrument of Government economic policy. In fact it is one of the most serviceable policy instruments to be used at the present time On the basis of the previous analysis of the short-range and long-range objectives of the defense mobilization effort we may conclude that the primary requisites for an adequate tax program for the period ahead are as follows : ( ) it should at least provide sufficient revenue to cover the cost of the national security programs so that a further growth in the public debt will not be necessary ; ( ) it should make a substantial contribution to economic stabilization ; and ( ) it should conform to the general principle that the tax burden should at all times be imposed in accordance with the ability of individual taxpayers to bear it and in a manner which will preserve work and production incentives The January Economic Report was emphatic in stating that the existing legislation is far from adequate in terms of the financial requirements of the mobilization effort notwithstanding the enactment by the last Congress of two revenue-raising measures with a combined yield of to billion dollars a year at present income levels. New tax legislation has been under active consideration by the present Congress since February when the President in a special tax message called for early enactment of higher tax rates to yield at least billion dollars annually and for the enactment later of the additional amounts needed to keep the defense program on a pay-aswe-go basis. As passed by the House of Representatives the tax bill falls about billion dollars short of the amount called for by the President ; and the increases will become effective at later dates than recommended Unless the bill is revised upward and passed within the immediate future it will probably fail to cover the fiscal year budget deficit ^ and will not adequately support the stabilization program The tax increases proposed by the President together with those enacted by the last Congress are in conformity with the tax policy requisites set forth above. They will satisfy immediate revenue requirements while preserving adequate work and production incentives. They will operate to limit spending in those income ranges where the bulk of spending is done while distributing the burden in reasonable accord with ability to pay The budgetary outlook and the need for heavier taxes. Difficulties arise in a period such as the present in deciding how large a revenue program is warranted on the basis of the budgetary outlook. There are more uncertainties than usual in estimating on the expenditure side the rate of acceleration of Federal spending and on the receipts side the extent of the increase in revenues in response to changes in personal and business incomes. A further consideration is that Government expenditure programs generate demands for goods and services several months in advance of the actual disbursement of Federal funds. Holders of Government contracts must order materials and equipment and hire labor before they can begin to produce. Final payments are not made by the procurement agencies until it is certified that the terms of the contract have been met which is usually dependent upon actual delivery or verified work in place including the accumulation of inventories. It is estimated that the amount of net accounts payable by the Federal Government to business concerns as a result of work done or in process was over billion dollars at the close of the fiscal year These payables are of significance in assessing the relation of formal budgetary balance to the growth of inflationary pressures The budget surplus of % billion dollars in the fiscal year just ended is a source of gratification but we can not be complacent on this score The surplus is the product not only of the higher tax rates which became effective in the latter half of calendar year but also of the inflation of prices and incomes since Korea. The fact that a limited inflation may create the appearance of budgetary strength is a paradox inherent in the inflationary process The budgetary outlook is for rising receipts but for more rapidly rising expenditures. In the absence of new tax legislation the tendency will be for expenditures to exceed receipts by increasing amounts during the fiscal years and The quarterly movement of budget receipts and expenditures and the public debt is shown in chart for the period since the beginning of Military expenditures including military end-items shipped to our allies were at an annual rate of about billion dollars during April-June of this year. By the same quarter of next year they are expected to rise to an annual rate of between and billion dollars according to current budget expenditure estimates. The advance in the rate of total budget spending during the same period will be larger than the increase in military expenditures due in part to the expansion in the atomic energy program and in various defense production activities With present taxes and the scheduled increases in expenditures it is estimated that the deficit will rise to an annual rate ( seasonally adjusted ) in excess of billion dollars by the end of the current fiscal year compared with about a 2-billion-dollar rate in the quarter just closed. This estimate makes liberal allowance for the effect of increasing national income on tax revenues. With Federal expenditures for the fiscal year expected to total between and billion dollars compared with the fiscal estimate of billion an even larger deficit rate is indicated for that year As was emphasized when the 10-billion-dollar program was first presented it is a minimum program which if speedily enacted would meet the immediate revenue needs. The tax bill passed by the House of Representatives which is estimated to yield about billion dollars in a full year of operation will not satisfy pay-as-we-go requirements. With the effective dates provided in the House bill the yield will be only % billion dollars in the fiscal year Taxation as an instrument of economic stabilization. The major contribution of taxation to economic stabilization is through its direct and indirect effects on spending. Under the assumptions made with respect to the various factors which will determine the trend of production income and expenditures a rise in personal income of to billion dollars was indicated for the period a year hence. Considerably more than the 10-billiondollar tax program would be needed to absorb the additional spending which would be created by a growth in income of this magnitude. The effect of additional revenue changes on the " inflationary gap " will ordinarily be much less than doilar-for-dollar. A part of the tax increase will be paid CHART FEDERAL BUDGET RECEIPTS EXPENDITURES AND THE PUBLIC DEBT The large budget surplus in the first quarter of when heavy income tax payments fell due was followed by a budget d e f i c i t in the second quarter. The public debt was reduced by about b i l lion dollars during the year ended June BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS NET BUDGET RECEIPTS M BUDGET QUARTERLY TOTALS EXPENDITURES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS END OF QUARTER BILLIONS OF DOLLARS DEBT I I CALENDAR YEARS SOURCE : TREASURY DEPARTMENT out of idle savings for example rather than out of funds that would otherwise be spent. To the extent that this occurs the anti-inflationary effects are less direct than when active funds are tapped ; nevertheless the effects should not be disregarded. If the same amount of funds had to be supplied by Government borrowing debt management and credit control problems would tend to be aggravated The President 's February tax message recommended an immediate increase in personal income taxes to bring in billion dollars annually in additional revenue increases in selective excise taxes to yield an additional billion dollars and an increase in corporate income taxes to yield billion dollars. The first two of these recommendations would have a direct impact on the growth of consumer spending power either through a reduction in the disposable income of individuals ( i. e. the amount of income available to individuals after payment of personal taxes ) or through the absorption of purchasing power as money is spent on goods and services subject to Federal excises. The increases in excises would also tend to divert some spending away from those taxable items which require for their production raw materials which are expected to be in particularly short supply The proposed increases in corporate taxes will contribute to stabilization through a reduction in dividend payments and by curtailing the supply of funds available for corporate spending or investing. The increases are also needed because excessively high profits after taxes increase pressure for wage increases of a size and character that would not be consistent with over-all stabilization objectives Relation to consumer spending. Some evidence as to the probable antiinflationary effectiveness of last year 's increase in the individual income tax and of the increase in the individual income tax and excises included in the 10-billion-dollar tax proposal can be obtained from an analysis of the indicated source of the additional tax payments by broad income groups. It is important to know the extent to which the additional payments will come from those income groups which normally account for the bulk of the spending in consumer markets. While this is not the sole criterion for appraising the tax proposals nor even the most important of the several criteria which must be applied it is a means of gauging the probable effect on consumer spending The results of this analysis are summarized in table At money income levels in prospect for the fiscal year the income range between $ and $ a year will include about half of all spending units and somewhat more than half of total money income before taxes This is the broad middle income range where higher taxes if properly distributed can yield significant amounts of additional revenue and result in a nearly equivalent reduction in consumer spending without making serious inroads upon essential living standards. Much of the saving in this income range " takes the form of insurance commitments and mortgage repayments TABLE Actual and proposed increases in individual income and excise taxes by income group estimated for fiscal year ( Percentage distribution ] Annual money income All income groups Item Actual and proposed increases since Korea in individual income and excise taxes _ _ Spending units. _ Money income before taxes Consumption expenditures ( assuming " normal " spending habits ) Under $ $ to $ Over $ EXPLANATORY NOTE. The distribution of spending units and money income before taxes is based upon the distribution in the Survey of Consumer Finances sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The upward shift in spending units from which is the year covered by the Survey to the fiscal year was estimated under the assumption that the projected rise in total income was distributed proestimated distribution of the actual and proposed increases in individual income and excise taxes was calculated as follows : ( ) The increases in the individual income tax were obtained by adjusting the average Federal income tax liability expressed as a percentage of money income in each income class in for the rate changes in the Revenue Act of and for the further advance proposed by the Treasury ; ( ) the proposed increases in excise taxes were distributed partly on the basis of the distribution of consumption expenditures and partly on the basis of detailed information on expenditure patterns for commodities covered in the Treasury 's tax proposals. In view of the limited current information about family size and composition taxpaying status and consumption expenditures it was not possible to make refined adjustments for the tax changes at each income level. Nevertheless it is believed that the results shown in the table are adequate for use in terms of broad income groupings There is no comparable taxpaying capacity in the income group below $ even though this group will include approximately two-fifths of all spending units because the surplus of income over minimum living costs is very small for this group. The price rise has already brought serious hardship to many families in this group particularly to those near the bottom of the scale who are often dependent upon fixed incomes such as pensions and insurance payments At the other end of the income scale are single persons and families earning more than $ a year. Only one-tenth of the spending units are estimated to come within this highest income group but they will receive percent of total money income before taxes. The highest tenth of the population will account for an estimated percent of the total Federal income liability under the rates in effect before last year 's revenue legislation. This group is responsible for the bulk of the net personal saving in the economy and for almost one-fourth of total consumer spending Additional tax levies on these persons will come partly out of reduced savings but families with incomes in the lowest part of this range will be obliged to limit their consumption expenditures The significance of the estimates in the table is to show that more than one-half of the combined total of increases in the individual tax enacted last fall and increases in the individual income and excise taxes proposed by the President will come from the broad middle range where the contribution to economic stabilization would be especially helpful. Approximately onetenth of the increases ( mostly in the form of steeper excises ) will come from the group under $ and less than two-fifths from the group over $ The preceding estimates of the tax distribution do not however allow for the corporate income and excess profits taxes which account for to percent of the total actual and proposed increases since Korea. These taxes are likely to have a more than proportionate effect in relation to income on the group over $ because of the concentration of stock ownership in this income range. Ordinarily increases in the corporate taxes tend to reduce dividend payments and retained profits. To some extent they also affect prices and costs although this effect would be especially limited in a period of price control Relation of tax increases to rising incomes. The impact of personal income tax increases on individual taxpayers is greatly affected by whether their incomes are rising standing still or falling. The same defense effort which requires heavier taxes is also creating larger incomes and profits Despite the heavier personal income taxes provided by the Revenue Act of there have been large increases since the Korean outbreak in personal incomes after payment of taxes. Comparing the first half of with the same period this year we find that disposable personal income rose from to billion dollars The rise in personal income after taxes is expected to continue. It was estimated above that under the impact of the increase in production and in national security spending personal incomes may rise by to billion dollars over the next year and disposable income by to billion dollars less than this amount allowing for present tax rates. Such a rise in disposable income would be several times larger than the proposed increase of billion dollars in the individual income tax and about twice as large as the proposed increase of billion dollars in the individual income tax and the excises combined. For the population as a whole therefore these taxes would not prevent a further rise in disposable income This point can be developed further by referring to some illustrative calculations of the effect on particular taxpayers of the proposed income tax increases taking different assumptions as to changes in their current dollar incomes. When ranked by size of income the middlemost spending unit in this country had an annual money income of approximately $ in the period just before the start of fighting in Korea. By the first half of the average consumer undoubtedly will have a substantially higher income ; on the basis of the projections presented in this Report which allow for wage rate changes longer working hours new entrants into the labor force and other prospective changes the average family income would be to percent higher than in the second quarter of A family of four with a $ income would have paid $ in Federal income taxes before Korea. If we assume a percent rise in income this family would have $ before payment of taxes and under the proposed rate increases its tax liability would rise to $ ( compared with $ under the rates in effect before Korea ) The family 's income after taxes therefore would be $ or $ more than what it had before Korea when both income and taxes were lower. In other words the assumed rise of percent in income before taxes would mean a rise of percent in income after taxes for this family If a rise of percent is assumed the indicated rise in income after taxes is percent. If we take a married person with two dependents who was at the $ level before Korea the increase in income after taxes would be percent with a percent rise in income and percent with a percent rise While on the average income after personal taxes will probably rise under the impact of the defense program even with the proposed individual income tax increases many families with relatively fixed incomes will have no alternative but to adjust to a lower level. Even when disposable income rises this does not necessarily mean an improvement in the individual 's real income position and in his standard of living. In measuring real income price rises must be taken into account Impact of heavier taxes. It is always easy to find reasons why taxes should not be raised or why they should be raised in a different manner than that proposed. Recent months have provided no exception in this respect. The statements of witnesses before the House Committee on Ways and Means reflect sharply divergent views with virtually every feature of the proposed tax program being severely criticized by some group or other often for very different reasons Among the matters over which concern has been expressed is the question of whether the tax proposals are consistent with the need to preserve adequate work and management incentives. This is an important consideration since our production planning and economic control programs rest on the assumption that further increases in total output will be possible in the months ahead as more workers are drawn into the labor force the workweek lengthened and productivity continues to rise. Will these avenues for increased production be closed if the tax proposals are enacted ? Under the proposal for the individual income tax the actual tax liability at any given money income level would generally be lower than under the highest wartime rates. This results because of higher personal and dependency exemptions than during the war and because of the adoption of income splitting in which gave substantial benefits to married persons particularly in the higher income brackets. Whatever evidence is available suggests that considerably higher wartime rates would have been possible in the United States without any serious damage to work and investment incentives. It would seem therefore that the proposed rates are wholly consistent with the need to attract new entrants into the labor force to provide sufficient inducements to earn more pay by working longer hours and to encourage necessary investment and entrepreneurial undertakings Incentive questions also arise under the corporation and excess profits taxes. The rates proposed for the regular corporate income tax are considerably higher than the peak wartime rates ; on the other hand both the rates under the excess profits tax proposal and the proposed maximum effective rate limitation of percent are below the peak wartime levels Moreover the accelerated amortization provisions ease the impact of these rates on businesses undertaking defense-related facilities expansion. Perhaps these rate comparisons however are less important than other considerations such as the large number of profit opportunities in a high production defense economy the relatively low business risks that are ordinarily involved and the generally satisfactory level of business profits that would prevail even after full allowance for the proposed tax increases It is important to realize that the economic decisions of businesses and individual workers are always tempered by psychological factors. When taxpayers are convinced of the necessity and fairness of a particular tax program they will be more ready to carry the heavier tax load and to work longer and harder and invest more time and capital even though an increased share of additional earnings must be paid in taxes Another set of questions about the 10-billion-dollar tax program revolves around the general point as to how closely taxes are approaching the limit of what workers and business can bear. If the ratio of all Federal State and local taxes combined to national income were taken as a measure of the tax burden it would appear that the present burden would be about the same as that reached during World War II. Such a comparison however provides a highly misleading measure of the real economic burden in the two periods. The economic burden is more accurately measured by the proportion of total national production diverted to war or defense purposes and by the aggregate volume of goods and services remaining for civilian purposes since taxes finance but do not create this burden At the peak of the war the military program took percent of the gross national product or somewhat over twice the maximum percentage which will be required for the defense mobilization program as now conceived With the present program and the projected increase in production it is estimated that about dollars of goods and services per capita will be available for personal consumption during the first half of compared with dollars ( measured in today 's prices ) during the years to With a far lower economic burden at present than during the war we are paying about the same proportion of our national income in taxes The significance of this fact is that our present tax policy represents a decision to face the burden on a current basis which is desirable for a partial and possibly protracted mobilization The ratio of taxes to income is a general measure of the extent to which the Government through the use of fiscal measures has taken steps to curtail private spending and thereby reduce inflationary dangers. The more closely such spending is brought into line with available supplies the better the opportunities for achieving an equitable sharing of the economic burden The economic burden of a prolonged defense mobilization effort is not determined by the method of financing. If the size of the tax bite is lowered through borrowing there will be more liquid asset accumulation but not any more goods and services for consumers to buy ; and the requirements for debt service and debt retirement will be increased in the postemergency period when those who are now in the armed forces will share with the rest in paying the necessary taxes While a tax-income ratio which is higher than at present by the amount of the 10-billion-dollar tax proposal will not mean any heavier economic burden for the country as a whole it must be recognized that the tax increases may nevertheless bear heavily upon families living on fixed incomes. Such families together with low-income families generally are however also the groups which would be hardest hit by an inflationary price rise which the tax increase will aid in preventing. The earlier comparison of the proposed tax increases with the projected aggregate rise in income shows that enactment of the tax proposals will not prevent the majority of families and single individuals from ending up with larger disposable incomes in terms of current dollar amounts although not necessarily in terms of actual purchasing power Curtailment of less essential Federal spending Full attention should continue to be given to the possibility of further savings in budget expenditures since such savings will contribute to the pay-as-we-go objective and aid the stabilization program. Soon after the start of fighting in Korea the President took steps to curtail Federal spending for less essential public works and other programs and to review all budget requests against the more exacting criteria which must be applied in an emergency period. These steps have resulted in important savings Some of the reductions which have already been made will not be fully reflected in expenditures until the fiscal year or later. This is true for example of the reductions in authorizations for rural electrification loans and grants to States for hospital construction. The expenditures in the Budget for these programs will be made almost wholly from funds obligated in prior years. In the case of some other construction programs it has been necessary to bring about a significant shift of emphasis to projects which are vitally important to the national security effort National security programs veterans ' benefits and interest on the public debt account for more than percent of all Federal expenditures in the fiscal year A large part of the remaining expenditures are for such programs as public assistance grants price support activities mortgage purchases by the FNMA and grants for public roads ; programs of these types are fixed by law and are not subject to budgetary or appropriation control in any single year. It is readily apparent that very large reductions in expenditures are not possible in the absence of legislation requiring major curtailments in programs specifically prescribed by law While economy should be practiced it should be true economy. The short-sighted stripping down of essential services such as educational and health services would be inconsistent with building our economic strength That strength depends upon human resources even more than upon plant State and local participation in the stabilization program During World War II a special effort was made by State and local governments to conduct their own financial affairs in such a manner that they supported or at least did not counteract the national stabilization program. Organizations representing these governments formulated specific policy recommendations to guide State and local actions and these recommendations were extensively applied in the day-to-day operations of government Once again it has become important that State and local governments follow policies consistent with national needs and objectives. To the extent feasible these governments should restrict new and regular expenditure programs to activities which will best promote national defense and security Whenever State and local tax revenues exceed immediate needs the surplus should be used in ways which will both harmonize with efforts to restrain inflation and reduce the future financial problems of the State and local governments. Debt financing should of course be held to a minimum and debt repayment should be encouraged. As described in the section on debt management and credit policy State and local governments are already cooperating in the Voluntary Credit Restraint Program Credit policy The significant rise in the general price level since the outbreak of hostilities in Korea has been accompanied by a rapid expansion in private credit particularly bank loans. The loans of all commercial banks increased by more than ^ billion dollars in the 9-month period ending March The sharp expansion in loans was halted in April and May when the combined loan increase for the months amounted to about million dollars. At that time of the year there is usually a seasonal downturn in business loans As we enter the second half of a new upsurge in bank loans may be at hand partly because of the seasonal requirements of some indus- tries and partly because of the growing needs of expanding defense production. If we can strengthen the restraints upon prices inventory accumulations new housing construction and the output of some nonessential durable goods the total demand for loans may abate even though loans to expand defense production will increase. But at this time there are no signs of that abatement. The problem of restraining bank credit appears to be again very real In shaping our credit control measures it is essential that we assess the credit expansion problem accurately and adopt restraint policies designed to meet the specific requirements of the present national emergency The primary cause of the inflation in the past year has been the unprecedented rush for goods by business and consumers generally in anticipation of the effects of the expanding national security program. This extensive demand for goods has been financed in several ways. It has been financed out of expanding current incomes by the liquidation of savings out of past income and by credit expansion. Financing by credit expansion has been facilitated by the large amounts of Government securities held by financial institutions and by the fact that these institutions could sell their holdings to the Federal Reserve System to obtain loanable funds. Accordingly a more stringent policy of general credit restraint on the part of the Federal Reserve would have tended to reduce the total amount of purchases by making it somewhat more difficult to finance a portion of these purchases But in view of the alternative methods of financing available it is evident that any feasible Federal Reserve policy would only have tempered the over-all demand for goods and would not have curbed it sufficiently to have prevented much of the rise in prices which has occurred In the current national emergency measures of general credit restraint must be supplemented by selective measures. General credit measures do not distinguish between essential borrowing and nonessential borrowing The fact that some credit extension serves a useful purpose in helping us to reach our defense goal as rapidly as possible while other credit extension is less useful or even harmful makes it necessary to use credit controls as selectively as possible. Selective controls such as those imposed on consumer credit real estate credit and credit for security markets have a direct impact on nonessential credit extension and so have a continued usefulness in the mobilization period. General credit controls reach to areas not touched by selective credit measures Outside the area of selective credit controls direct controls over the production of goods also reduce the demand for credit by curtailing the goods which are available for purchase with borrowed or other funds. Selective means of restraining credit expansion must always be supplemented by direct controls of materials. Many firms can pay for much or all of their investment in plant and equipment without borrowing. Withholding of credit from some firms while others were able to resort to other means of finance would not assure the balanced growth of production required by mobilization Selective credit controls. Because of the need of curtailing credit for some purposes while funds have had to be made available for other purposes and sometimes in increasing amounts credit policy has made use of several selective controls. These controls are intended to restrict credit for the purchase of certain kinds of goods especially those the output of whicE must be curtailed to help divert scarce materials to production for the security programs. Such controls help to keep demand more nearly in balance with smaller supplies. They also limit somewhat the expansion of the money supply which accompanies lending by commercial banks and to that extent hold down the rise in spending pressures The first step in applying selective control was the tightening in July at the request of the President ^ of the terms of residential mortgages guaranteed or insured by Government agencies. In October under authority derived from the Defense Production Act the Federal Reserve Board with the concurrence of the Housing and Home Finance Administration imposed regulations on conventional mortgages on new oneand two-family houses. At the same time the terms of Government insured or guaranteed mortgages on similar houses both old and new were brought into conformity with the Board 's regulations. In January the Board 's regulations and a comparable tightening of Government terms were extended to three- and four-family houses and apartments. In February the Board also applied regulations on loans for most new commercial construction The selective control of residential mortgage credit was intended with the complement of restrictions on the use of some materials used in construction to reduce new housing starts during about one-third below the record level of Results at first were disappointing. New starts in January including public housing units which are not subject to these controls were nearly percent above January A large backlog of financing commitments had been entered into before the October controls became effective. This along with the continued availability of building materials and the desire of builders to undertake as much construction as possible before materials controls could have a real impact have been largely responsible for delaying the effect of this selective control. In the second quarter of however housing starts were about percent below the level of the same period last year and it now appears probable that some progress toward the announced goal of curtailment is being achieved In September also under the authority provided by the Defense Production Act the Federal Reserve Board placed regulations on instal- ment loans for the purchase of automobiles and certain other consumer durables. The terms of the regulations were stiffened in October. The purpose of these regulations is similar to that of the controls on housing and commercial construction credit. The consumer instalment credit regulations were however more immediately effective. Total instalment credit which had expanded about percent during the third quarter of was held to a rise of less than percent during the fourth quarter. During the first half of instalment credit outstanding declined about million dollars or percent compared with a rise of billion dollars during the same period of The drop in total instalment credit reflects not only the effect of the regulations but also the influence of other factors which have caused consumer demand to subside somewhat from the high levels reached after Korea The authority of the Board of Governors to regulate mortgage credit would be more effective if expanded to cover old houses. Mortgages guaranteed or insured by Government agencies on both new and old houses are already subject to terms comparable to those of the Federal Reserve Board 's regulations which under the present law apply to new units only The restraint of conventional borrowing for the purchase of old houses would not of course assist in directing materials to defense production ; but it would help to check inflation. Furthermore funds to make the higher down payments required on new houses are often obtained by selling old houses under very liberal credit terms It is desirable that Congress provide authority for placing margin requirements on speculative trading in commodity futures. Such legislation would further strengthen credit policy in combating inflation. It would apply to commodity markets a principle of regulation imposed more than years ago on the securities markets Voluntary credit restraint program. On March of this year a voluntary credit restraint program including the major financial institutions throughout the Nation was instituted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System pursuant to Section of the Defense Production Act. A statement of principles to be used by all lenders as a guide in distinguishing between essential and nonessential loans has been distributed to all of the participants in the program. The test for desirable lending in the present national emergency was declared to be whether a particular loan would commensurately increase or maintain production processing and distribution of essential goods and services A National Committee under the direction of a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System has been established as a general supervisory body as well as some regional committees covering all sections of the country. The statement of principles of the program serves as an over-all guide to lending institutions in their lending activities In cases however in which lending institutions are doubtful as to whether a particular loan request can be granted within the framework of the program the regional committees stand ready to act as the ultimate judge The continuing effort to make the program of voluntary credit restraint more effective should receive the full and active support of private and Government lenders. Voluntary restraints have the selectivity so necessary during the mobilization period. In order that the campaign of voluntary control may be as effective as possible it is necessary that the lending policies of Government agencies continue to be kept in conformity with those of private institutions. It is also essential that the voluntary credit control committee be guided at all times by the production goals set by mobilization agencies Lending activities of Government agencies. At the same time that Government insured or guaranteed residential mortgages were tightened other Government owned or sponsored lending agencies were requested to reorient their lending policies to the needs of defense. New programs of defense financing have provided credit for the expansion of defense production whenever needed funds have not been obtainable from private sources. Credit for purposes not related to military or essential civilian output has been curtailed As has been observed in the discussion of the voluntary credit control program it is necessary that the lending policies of Government agencies adhere to the guides established for private lending agencies if the voluntary program is to work effectively. This requires that the various Government agencies continue to scrutinize their lending activities with the utmost care Reserve requirements. Early this year the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System raised the reserve requirements of member banks percentage points against net demand deposits and percentage point against time deposits. This action raised the reserve requirements of member banks to the full limit authorized by statute except for an additional percentage points which may be imposed on net demand deposits held by central reserve city banks New York and Chicago Additional authority to control bank reserves would be a valuable means to restrict credit under several possible conditions. Any such new authority over reserves should be adaptable to meet varying circumstances. It is also imperative that any additional requirements for bank reserves imposed by the Federal Reserve should be such that they do not have a disruptive effect on the market for Government securities The report of the President 's Committee on Credit Policy recommended that as an emergency measure legislation be sought to empower the Federal Reserve authorities for a limited period to impose additional reserve requirements. The report suggested that two plans had the greatest promise namely : ( ) the loan expansion reserve plan and ( ) the primary reserve plan with a Government securities feature which provides for addi- tional required reserves with the option under conditions to be prescribed by regulation of holding the additional reserves in the form of cash or Government securities The report of the President 's Committee also recommended that in view of the emergency any additional reserve requirements should apply to all insured banks ; and that the feasibility of permitting non-member insured banks to hold the additional reserves in balances with their correspondents should be explored. Broadening of the authority in this manner would increase its effectiveness and would avoid placing on member banks a disproportionate share of the burden of checking inflation We believe these recommendations should be adopted Use of executive authority. The authority exists under emergency legislation for the President by executive order to put a positive limit on the volume of loans which may be made. These powers are available should the situation with respect to credit expansion become critical Debt management The policies and operations of the Treasury in the management of the public debt have a significant bearing on the stability and well-being of the Nation 's economy. The successful merging of revenue measures and borrowing programs in such a way as to make the most effective contribution to the productive powers of the Nation is one of the most difficult and most important problems on the domestic front A weapon of great importance for keeping inflationary forces under control is a debt management program which is directed toward placing the largest possible proportion of Government securities in the hands of nonbank investors and reducing the proportion held by the commercial banking system. In the last half of the calendar year nonbank holdings of Government securities reached an all-time peak while holdings of the commercial banking system declined to a new postwar low. This was accomplished despite the fact that the over-all decline in the amount of public debt outstanding was less than billion dollars during this period. The policy of reducing bank holdings of Government securities was aided during the first months of by the existence of a budget surplus. Because of the prompt action of the Congress in enacting two new revenue-producing measures within a few months after the outbreak of aggression in Korea the Federal Government operated with a budget surplus during the first year of mobilization. Receipts during the fiscal year which ended on June exceeded expenditures by 5/2 billion dollars. The surplus from January through June was in fact billion dollars. A part of this surplus was used to reduce the amount of total debt outstanding ; and a large part of this reduction occurred in the holdings of the banking system Unfortunately it will not be possible in the period ahead to continue to reduce the total amount of debt outstanding. In the absence of new tax legislation the budget of the Federal Government for the current fiscal year would show a deficit of about billion dollars In this situation the most that the Treasury can hope to do is to continue to emphasize its program of shifting holdings of Government securities out of the banking system into the hands of nonbank investors. This objective can be furthered by continued careful attention to the sources of funds available for investment in Government securities ; and a continuation of the program of carefully selecting new and refunding issues of securities which are suitable to the needs of the various investor classes An important measure in carrying out this policy is the savings bond program. The Treasury has carried on an intensified payroll savings campaign to reach the expanding incomes of consumers and so draw inflationary funds from the spending stream since shortly after the present disturbed international situation was forced upon us. The Secretary of the Treasury announced just a few days ago that a Nation-wide savings bond drive would get under way commencing on Labor Day Since the Federal Government operated with a budget surplus for the fiscal year as a whole all of the debt operations of the Treasury during the year were on net balance refunding operations. They were of considerable significance and in the first half of varied in character At the request of the Treasury the Congress enacted legislation which permits holders of maturing Series E bonds to maintain their investment in these bonds and continue to earn interest on their face amounts for up to additional years. This is an important step in providing an incentive for individuals to maintain the savings which they hold in this form On March the Treasury announced that it would exchange a portion of its outstanding long-term marketable bonds for a new nonmarketable issue. A new investment series of % percent year nonmarketable bonds was offered in exchange for the outstanding 2l/2 percent marketable bonds of June and December Nearly billion dollars of the outstanding amount of billion dollars of the two marketable issues was exchanged for the new nonmarketable issue The Treasury also announced on May a new series of Treasury savings notes and the discontinuance of the sale of old Series D savings notes. The new notes are similar to the old series except that the interest return will run from percent if the notes are held for months or less to percent if the notes are held for the full 3-year term. This compares with percent for months and percent for years on the old issue In June another large refunding operation was carried through. An offer was made to exchange the billion dollars of % percent partially tax-exempt Treasury bonds called for redemption on June and the billion dollars of * percent Treasury notes maturing July into 9y2 month % percent certificates of indebtedness. More than billion dollars or nearly percent of the maturing issues were exchanged for the new security In the first week of the new fiscal year the Treasury started a " new money " borrowing program by asking for tenders on its weekly Treasury bill offering in an amount million dollars in excess of the maturing issue. Already million dollars of " new money " has been borrowed in this fashion. There will continue to be deficit financing in the period ahead. The exact amount depends upon the magnitude and nature of the new taxes provided by the Congress. But in any event the amount will be substantial. Its successful financing will require a confident and stable condition in the market for Government securities On July the Secretary of the Treasury announced the first large refunding operation of the current fiscal year. An 11-month % percent certificate of indebtedness was offered in exchange for the billion dollars of * percent notes maturing on August Price policy Earlier in Part II of this Review the Council indicated why price control is an essential feature of an effective stabilization program particularly during the early stages of the very large defense build-up. We also expressed the view that the economic outlook does not now justify the abandonment or weakening of price control. But price control and other measures should be geared to the kind of mobilization which we are now undertaking its likely duration and its probable impact upon the economy. The problem is to find the most practical kind of price control for the situation now confronting us Progress of price stabilization to date. There have been three stages in the progress of price stabilization thus far : ( ) the initial period when major reliance was placed on voluntary restraint in combination with general measures to reduce demand ; ( ) the imposition of direct mandatory controls by the issuance of the general freeze in late January ; and ( ) the subsequent " interim " period of adjustment With the passage of the Defense Production Act the task was begun of organizing an Economic Stabilization Agency and Office of Price Stabilization to be ready if direct controls should later prove to be required Prior to the issuance of the General Ceiling Price Regulation in late January the Government had increased taxes imposed credit restrictions and established a number of controls over the flow of scarce and essential materials Moreover business labor farmers and consumers had repeatedly been urged to exercise restraint in their buying and selling and in their price and wage policies. Price increases of raw materials and commodities at wholesale which got under way in the summer of were checked near the end of the third quarter as the Communists were driven back in Korea. For weeks before the blow from the Chinese the wholesale price index advanced very slowly. The course of prices of basic raw materials had changed from an upward rush to a series of fluctuations The Chinese intervention in late November created a new situation and made positive the necessity for intensified mobilization efforts. It also set into motion a new wave of price increases. Several direct actions were taken to curb price advances. Efforts were redoubled to provide an adequate staff for the Office of Price Stabilization. Meanwhile a set of Voluntary Pricing Standards was announced ; meetings were held with producers of a number of basic industrial commodities to explore ways of stabilizing prices in those fields ; and several hundred large firms were requested to give prior notice of intended price increases. Earlier the first price ceiling regulation had been issued controlling manufacturers ' prices of new automobiles. The great difficulties encountered in building up staff hampered and delayed the development of more effective price control In spite of the conscientious efforts of many sellers to comply with the voluntary standards the price increases continued apace. In response to this situation and in spite of a still short-handed staff the Office of Price Stabilization in late January issued the General Ceiling Price Regulation freezing most domestic prices. There were some major gaps in the coverage of this regulation required by the farm provisions of the Defense Production Act and by the complexities of applying a freeze-type regulation to all kinds of markets. A companion regulation freezing wages and salaries was issued simultaneously as required by the Defense Production Act This action was in sharp contrast to the development of price control in World War II which began with selective controls and subsequently culminated in the General Maximum Price Regulation some months later with wages remaining uncontrolled for several months more A general price freeze however can not be more than a stopgap measure The third stage in the evolution of price stabilization has therefore been the effort to introduce necessary flexibility During the past five months four broad areas of activity may be distinguished : ( ) the issuance of margin-type regulations for most commodities sold at retail and many sold at wholesale ; ( ) the development of " interim " regulations calling for new ceiling prices to be computed by adding to preKorea prices the subsequent increases in costs of labor and materials ( but not including overhead cost increases ) with a view to the restoration of pre-Korea gross seller margins for most manufacturers and at the same time providing for rollbacks of prices which had advanced excessively ; ( ) the institution of a group of regulations covering specific commodities at the primary market level and largely in dollars-and-cents terms e. g. soybeans scrap metals hides and skins cotton cocoa coffee and wool ; and ( ) the issuance of the beef regulation the first tailored regulation setting dollars- and-cents ceilings from the primary to the consumer level with more such regulations to come The establishment of margin-type regulations at retail and wholesale was designed to relieve distributors of the squeeze created by the lag between prices and replacement costs establishing a more normal margin structure by rolling back excessive margins and preparing a firm foundation particularly in the case of food for the future development of dollars-and-cents price ceilings. Margin-type regulations permit the pass-through of cost increases into retail prices ; likewise they require retail prices to be reduced when costs have been reduced. The effectiveness of a margin regulation at retail in maintaining stable prices depends on the effectiveness with which suppliers ' prices are stabilized. The structure of the plan is strongly influenced by considerations of practicality. Thus the maintenance of dollars-and-cents gross margins would lead to less price increase than the percentage mark-up formula. However specified dollars-and-cents mark-ups like dollars-andcents price ceilings are workable only in highly standardized commodity areas where changes in products are infrequent which rules out their use in a major sector of the broad market territory covered by the present wholesale and retail regulations Another major step has been the program to reprice manufactured goods The general manufacturers ' formula in essence sets new ceiling prices by permitting manufacturers to add to their pre-Korea prices only increases in labor and material costs occurring after July The regulations also provide that cost increases after specified dates shall not be included. In the case of labor increases the cutoff date is March ; in the case of materials the dates vary. Since one manufacturer 's price is frequently another manufacturer 's cost the intention is to require recalculation to take account of the changes in costs brought about by the first calculations under the manufacturers ' regulations themselves. The manufacturers ' formula would require rollbacks where prices being charged were in excess of the ceiling prices as computed under the formula. The effective date of the manufacturers ' regulations has been postponed pending the renewal of the Defense Production Act At the time of the price freeze many cost-price and interprice relationships were untenable from any continuing point of view. Price relationships are rarely if ever in complete equilibrium but the wide variations in the rates of different price increases prior to the price freeze had greatly distorted earlier more normal relationships. The distortions involved serious inequities among businesses. Much more important for the future of the economy many of the distortions had to be corrected if goods were to continue to move through the markets in the large volume required for a high employment economy in general and a defense economy in particular. Much of the effort reflected in the price orders thus far issued to modify the general price freeze has been directed to reestablishing tenable relationships among relative prices. By combining some adjustments upward with some rollbacks the general purpose has been to correct inequities and disparities with a minimum impact on the general price level. Once this interim action has been completed it should be possible to hold firmly the great majority of prices without further adjustment Upon completion of its " interim " phase the price-control effort should look to the development of a program geared to future requirements The time is a particularly appropriate one therefore for considering what the central principles of such a program should be Principles for further price control. Generally speaking stability of the general price level is a desirable objective. The exceptions to this rule occur ( a ) after a severe deflation when a general upward movement of the price structure is a necessary component of economic recovery and ( b ) in a period-when general downward price adjustments are needed to maintain maximum employment and production Since the Korean outbreak neither of these extreme situations has occurred and neither is foreseeable in the near future. A general upward movement has not been and is not now needed3 because broadly speaking profits have supplied ample funds and incentives to sustain a level of business investment even higher than would be desirable. A general downward movement of prices while very desirable from the viewpoint of consumers would not be consistent with the business sentiment required for a vigorous expansion of production especially in those commodities where rising costs have caught up with rising prices. Price stability is conducive to defense planning and to business planning. Also the erratic behavior of consumers is minimized if they anticipate price stability After the general price freeze in late January no further price action would have been urgent if price stabilization were the only objective to be sought. But price stability can not be the only objective since we can not disregard other vital objectives such as equity and reasonable balance in the price structure and the maintenance and expansion of necessary production These objectives depend upon some flexibility even under stabilization Consequently in the period ahead the question is not whether the pattern of ceiling prices will need to be modified but rather how it should be modified and under what circumstances Formulae to allow prices in general to rise after a price freeze would be needed only if the freeze worked general hardship or inequity or operated upon the financial position or intentions of wide segments of business in a manner inconsistent with necessary productive expansion and fair returns upon investment and effort. Only if this happened or threatened would other objectives outweigh the gains to be derived from general price stability in a defense emergency. Since this contingency has not arisen and is not a foreseeable prospect the problem now is not to devise formulae for general price increases but rather to take steps which modify the price freeze at those points where modification is urgent These modifications however should not allow the exceptions to obscure the general rule that the price line in the main should be held. Although some price increases are needed to restore balance or to provide incentives and encourage production the argument that they are needed for this purpose is often pushed too far. Price stability in the main achieves equitable results and encourages production by discouraging inventory speculation and thus tending to increase the output of final goods ; by facilitating the system of priorities and allocations ; by spurring cost reduction techniques ; and by reducing the causes of labor disputes Some specific prices may have to be adjusted for reasons of fairness or in order to increase the flow of production of specific commodities in which an expansion is particularly desired to promote the defense effort. A number of these price adjustments will relate to goods purchased by the armed forces and will be made in the process of contract negotiation. Some of them however may be required in other goods as well. It may be necessary to upset old cost-price relationships which have been in relatively stable equilibrium in order to achieve the dynamic result of expanding particular lines of production Finally incentives to efficiency must be adequate to assure that resources will produce the maximum total volume of production. Under the price adjustments efficient firms should be rewarded not penalized. Treating all producers of a commodity as a unit should be helpful in this respect In a few industries notably some of the mineral industries it may be so important to expand that special encouragement must be given to high-cost producers. Such encouragement should be given through carefully designed subsidies for increased production rather than through price increases The incentives argument always has an appeal and in some cases quite validly so. But reasonable incentives do not require realization of the highest profit aspirations that anyone might be able to make good on in a free market under inflationary pressures. Nor should price be regarded as the retarding factor in those situations where necessary production is in fact retarded by other conditions such as unavailability of materials or manpower. There are many instances where more careful programming and more effective and expeditious allocations to the right places will do far more to break bottlenecks in production than price increases and with less danger to the structure of inflation control. In the main price increases to provide incentives can not be a general rule if there is to be effective stabilization. Such increases should be processed as special cases There will be pressures to raise other prices particularly as various costs get out of line. Thus a wage increase that is not accompanied by an equal or greater increase in productivity gives rise to pressure for upward price adjustments. It is clear that if prices are to be stabilized wages must be stabilize ^ also. However it does not follow that every increase in costs whether of labor or other factors must be followed by an increase in prices. If the upward spiral is not to continue indefinitely it is important that this not happen If an industry despite increases in costs still has funds and incentives adequate or more than adequate to bring forth desirable production price adjustments upward are in the main unnecessary. The absorption of increases in costs without price increases is a large part of the history of our industrial and technological progress and is particularly important during a period when general price stabilization is essential. On the other hand the denial of price increases to an industry or business which has not experienced cost increases may nonetheless be injurious to the defense program and the national economy if that particular industry or business genuinely needs more incentives to do its job This does not mean that business costs are irrelevant to price policy ; it does mean that the adjustment of prices upward or downward on an arbitrary basis in response to cost changes without consideration of the over-all financial position of the industry or business after taking account of these changes is much too narrow an approach to the basic issues underlying price adjustments under price control. The more appropriate approach is to take account of cost factors along with other relevant factors The machine tool industry is perhaps a good example of a case where the application of a cost formula did not provide adjustments needed in view of the vast expansion now required of that industry. The problem was met by the issuance of a special price regulation for machine tools providing a liberal basis for the calculation of price adjustments The allowance of price adjustments on a more or less automatic basis to cover changes in costs is sometimes likened to cost-of-living adjustments in wages. But the resemblance is only superficial. Gost-of-living adjustments do not of themselves permit any increase in real wages ; they simply recognize that price inflation is neither an equitable way of reducing wages nor conducive to high morale. Such cost-of-living adjustments are not inconsistent with other restraints which prevent wages from rising as they would rise in a free market under defense conditions which make labor very scarce. In contrast the allowance of price adjustments on a more or less automatic basis to cover changes in costs regardless of profit margins would probably tend to push profits higher and higher in ratio to other incomes and would reject the principle of absorption of some cost increases which has been typical of American business progress To be sure wages affect business costs and consequently business prices can not be stabilized if wages and farm prices move upward without restraint This is one reason why an effective stabilization program must deal with wages as well as business prices. Nonetheless stabilization efforts must move forward in each sector of the economy simultaneously instead of each sector waiting for some other sector to be completely stabilized first A sound stabilization program should not permit further price increases to result automatically from cost increases but instead should determine whether the cost increases are of a magnitude to impair adequate earnings related to production needs and incentives The foundations for this approach have been laid in the Economic Stabilization Administrator 's letter of April to the Director of Price Stabilization outlining a longer-range price policy. This letter directs the price control agency as a general rule after the completion of " interim " adjustments not to permit any general increase in ceiling prices for any industry unless its present rate of profits before taxes is below percent of its profits in the three best years in the period to adjusted for changes in net worth. This formula is based on the present excess profits law. The directive also ensures that future cost increases will be absorbed to a reasonable extent and will not automatically form the basis for future price increases The Council is not in a position to evaluate whether this formula is correct in detail or whether the profit level set forth in this formula is necessarily the most desirable one. The formula does however offer the prospect of putting price control on a more sustainable basis under current and foreseeable conditions. Since the formula is on an " industry " basis it needs to be accompanied by standards permitting individual manufacturers to receive relief where they need it in line with production objectives or considerations of equity. Initial action has been taken in this direction As part of the transition from the interim stage of price stabilization just indicated regulations tailored to the needs and complexities of different industries should be developed as rapidly as possible. This will have the added advantage of permitting more effective compliance and enforcement In particular it is necessary to develop many more dollars-and-cents ceilings especially at the consumer level Thus the Council feels that price policy should now focus upon holding the line in general while specific energies should be dedicated to the swift working out of adjustments in those limited situations where additional production incentives are required and can not otherwise be achieved or where elementary fairness requires adjustments in limited instances. While some rollbacks may be essential and while some other actions may be needed for equitable reasons they should not be allowed to divert energy from the policy of holding the price line in general. This policy would in the judgment of the Council commend itself to the public and serve the needs of the kind of defense mobilization now under way A coordinated relationship between price and production controls is necessary to assure that they do not work at cross purposes. Production controls should be used to facilitate stabilization. During World War II a serious problem was the dropping of low-priced lines and their upgrad- ing to higher price lines. This was particularly troublesome in apparel and house furnishings. Up to now the problem in these fields has been the large rise in prices generally rather than the dropping of low-priced lines. However this problem may appear first in consumer durable goods with heavy cuts in civilian uses scheduled for steel copper and aluminum. This problem bears close watching. The need for such coordination has been recognized in a directive of January issued by the Director of Defense Mobilization which instructs the production agencies to cooperate with the OPS in ensuring an adequate supply of essential and low priced consumer goods One of the most inflationary sectors of the United States price structure since the Korean outbreak has been the extreme rise in basic imported raw materials. Basic raw materials form the group whose prices are most sensitive to changes in demand. It is obvious that as long as these are free to move they are a source of great difficulty in holding the price line and in keeping down the cost of the defense effort. At present most of'these prices are below the peaks reached early this year. However as long as world-wide demand for these products continues greater than normal because of the mounting defense program of the free world there is always the possibility that they will resume their upward flight In the case of these commodities we are faced with a real dilemma We can put rigorous control on their prices when sold in the United States But if we do so we run the risk that the domestic level will be enough below the world level to prevent us from obtaining an adequate supply If we follow rising world prices we introduce a major factor of instability into our economy. Ideally international allocation at reasonable prices would achieve effective stabilization and assure the free nations of a fair share of these basic commodities. These problems are being discussed at a number of international conferences with a view to arriving at the best methods of handling these problems. The international allocation agreements recently arrived at for tungsten and molybdenum include price provisions Meanwhile in two cases tin and natural rubber the United States Government has taken over the importing function. Prices of these commodities have declined in part because of the more orderly buying procedures in part also because of the lower levels of current United States purchasing. In the event however that international agreements can not be arrived at and the price rise of imported materials is resumed it may be necessary to use subsidies in some cases to prevent unfavorable repercussions on the domestic price levels Subsidies and food prices The major function of price in a free economy is to induce the production of the goods desired by the people in the volume they demand and are willing to pay for. When as at present circumstances require that prices be put under control one of the major principles determining price policy is the achievement of maximum production particularly of goods most needed for the defense program. Another method of stimulating production which is an alternative to higher prices is for the Government to pay the producer a subsidy in addition to the price he receives from his customers. The funds to pay subsidies come out of Government revenues that is out of taxes instead of out of prices. In some kinds of situations the granting of subsidies is preferable as a production stimulant to permitting price increases while in other kinds of situations subsidies are undesirable The clear occasion for the use of subsidies to induce needed production is where it is necessary to secure supplies from high-cost sources of production which will not respond to the price offer which is bringing the bulk of the needed output into the market. Where the high-cost producer can be clearly identified and it is therefore possible to determine the differential in price which is required to cover his extra cost the subsidy payment is not only permissible but it is an excellent method to obtain additional supplies. If a piarket price of $ per unit is high enough to lead to the production and sale of million units of a necessary commodity but the production of an additional units would require a price of $ there is no justification in a period of emergency for permitting a demand for units to bring about a market price of $ for the entire supply if it is possible to pay the extra cents only to those who are burdened by the higher cost The need for use of subsidies to minimize market price increases becomes more acute as the pressure of demand upon scarce supplies builds up and as increasingly high-cost sources of additional supply have to be tapped The principle of differential subsidies to marginal supplies is particularly applicable and it should be applied freely ^ in the case of minerals. Highcost mines can be brought into production in most mining fields if a higher price is paid. Current output yielding a satisfactory profit at current prices will continue without an increase in price and the mine operator should not be given windfall profits because the national need for additional supplies in an emergency period compels the payment of higher prices for additional supplies. The high-cost production can be identified the amount of additional payment therefor can be determined and it should be paid in the form of a subsidy while the general market price is held The same policy is proper in the case of imported commodities both minerals and other goods. Where higher-cost imported goods must supplement the domestic supply of the same commodities in order to meet essential requirements the domestic price should be held and subsidies in the necessary amount should be paid to the importer. The high-cost supplier is in such a case easily identified and the necessary differential is readily determined. The policy may well be extended further with respect to some I52 imported goods where they constitute the entire supply and are important elements of cost. In order to limit the effect upon the cost of domestic production into which foreign materials enter it is sound policy in some cases for the Government to fix a low price on the sale of imported materials and to absorb the loss. These policies were applied in many cases during World War II The question has also arisen as to whether subsidies should now be used generally to hold down the price of food by making payments to farmers in lieu of price increases which otherwise might be necessary to obtain an adequate volume of farm production First of all in this connection it is necessary to say something about farm prices and incomes in general and about the national policy of farm parity and farm price supports There has been some tendency in recent years to misinterpret the trend of farm prices and farm incomes. Farm prices are more volatile than many other prices and respond more sensitively to market changes. While they have at times moved upward more rapidly than other prices they tend to move downward much more rapidly whenever any softening occurs in the general economic situation. Farm income declined much more rapidly than other major incomes in the recession and even though farm income has risen substantially in the past year a case can hardly be made that by sound criteria farm income as a whole is high in comparison with other incomes although there are exceptions in the case of some farm commodities This being the case there would seem to be no reason to tamper fundamentally with the parity principle even in the course of the stabilization effort. Even in that effort a fair relationship among groups should be maintained and the parity principle does not operate to confer unjust benefits upon farmers as a whole Insofar as farm prices rise above parity they can be subjected to controls the same as other prices except where this is prevented by special legislation. The Council does not favor such special exemptions This brings us to the view that the maintenance of the parity principle and of the customary farm price support program is not inconsistent with effective stabilization on a fair basis. Parity prices of farm products rise and fall with the index of prices paid by farmers. If nonfarm prices are held the parity index can rise only to the extent that there are increases in prices of feeds and other farm products bought by farmers. Insofar as the price of food to the consumer is determined by many other factors besides the price paid to the farmer the effort to stabilize the consumer 's food prices can not be limited to a consideration of farm prices Since the stabilization effort should be permitted to control farm prices when they shoot above parity the only sound basis for refraining from such control would be if higher prices are necessary to stimulate an adequate volume of farm production. The case for subsidies therefore must rest on the ground that it is better to hold the farm price line and pay subsidies to stimulate the needed production. There was such a program of food subsidies during World War II applying particularly to meat and dairy products which involved payments of about billion dollars. The rationale of this program was that it was necessary to prevent the spiralling effect upon wages and other costs of production if higher prices were paid for these food commodities in order to bring about the necessary volume of supplies. The record made a good case for the argument that the cost of the food subsidies was very much less than the cost in higher prices to consumers would have been if market prices had been relied upon to bring forth the necessary goods However a uniform subsidy paid to all producers of a commodity in general use should not be hastily substituted for a rise in price as an incentive to adequate production for a period of partial mobilization as long as now is in contemplation. It is more appropriate to an emergency situation of seemingly more defined length and when the pressure on supplies is more similar to the World War II situation than is now the case At this time it would not be prudent to embark upon a program to pay general food subsidies. There is now no marked deficiency in the supply of foods. The necessary increase in food production requires the liberal fulfillment of the needs of farmers for machinery fertilizer and labor Supplying these needs which we have ranked as equal with any of the demands of the defense program is under present circumstances sounder than a general program of subsidy payment. Under changed circumstances it would be appropriate to consider general food subsidies. The Council 's analysis points to the danger of renewed and increased inflationary pressures. The recent floods are a reminder that food supplies are never certain. As the President said in his Message of April to the Congress : " If we find that we can not hold the line on food prices with powers recommended here we shall need to consider legislation authorizing the use of other devices including limited food subsidies to prevent necessary price increases from being reflected in rises in the cost of living. " Wage policy Discussion of wage stabilization policy should differentiate clearly among three main aspects of the wage problem. These three aspects are : wages as an incentive and reward to workers for their efforts and as a factor in the movement of manpower ; wages as a factor in consumer purchasing power ; and wages as a major element in business costs. The difficult problem of wage stabilization is to achieve a wage policy which will permit wages to perform their function as incentive an/i reward for production and treat workers fairly while holding to a minimum the contribution of wages to higher prices. Wage increases may contribute to rising prices in two ways by adding to consumer spending power and by adding to business costs In considering wages as incentive and reward to workers and as a factor in consumer purchasing power it should be remembered that there are three distinct approaches to holding down consumer demand : ( ) prevent incomes from rising ( ) siphon off income through taxation and ( ) encourage larger savings. All three are needed in a stabilization program. The problem of wage stabilization is sometimes discussed as if the first of these approaches were the only one available to hold down the demand of workers for consumer goods to the supplies available. But this imposes an impossible burden on wage policy for it might follow that there should be no increase in the total of real wages during the next year or so since consumer supplies can not be increased appreciably due to the defense effort. Such a wage policy would be unattainable in fact and insupportable even if it could be attained. With the employed growing in number and with hours increasing in some industries such a policy would require both a reduction in wage rates and a reduction in the real earnings of the average employee. This would be incompatible with the concept of wages as an incentive and reward to workers or with fairness or industrial peace. In an expanding economy it would result in other types of income moving forward while individual wages were reduced. It would represent a decision that if a large portion of total income throughout the economy must go into savings to prevent inflation only an unduly small fraction of this saving opportunity should accrue to wage earners. And such an unworkable policy as applied to wages would be compounded by the fact that increased personal income taxes cut heavily into take-home pay in any event Consequently the essence of sound wage stabilization is to place considerable restraint upon swelling wage incomes but not to impose such restraints as would disregard the function of wages as a reward and incentive for employees For the kind of partial mobilization period which now confronts us the major elements in a sound wage stabilization policy seem to be the following : First Government action under current conditions should be directed toward restraining wage increases of the magnitude which an economy operating at such high levels of production could afford if the defense output were not so great as to cut into rising standards of living Second wage adjustments should be approvable at regular intervals to cover past increases in the cost of living. Maintenance of real wages during inflation can not in fairness be disallowed. It is unlikely that any free government can successfully hold wages rigid if it is not successful in holding the line on the cost of living ; and insofar as that line is held the so-called " escalation " of wages is reduced to minor significance. As a corollary of this however it should be frankly recognized that " escalation " of wages does become one of the moving factors in the spiral of inflation if the cost of living is not substantially stabilized ; and therefore holding the line on the cost of living is essential to stabilization on the wage side as well as on the price side Third a more difficult problem is presented as to whether wage increases should be permitted to reflect increases in productivity. Many workers for example those paid on a piece-rate basis already receive higher wages when their productivity increases. Farmers and businesses receive higher incomes as their productivity increases. Neither production nor morale would be furthered if large segments of workers were denied a return for their contribution and they do make a very real contribution to increased productivity However if no restrictions whatsoever were placed upon wage increases based upon " productivity " wage stabilization would become almost impossible. Wage increases of any size might be negotiated and denominated as " productivity gains " Such gains first obtained in particular sectors of the economy would under a stabilization program tend to become generalized throughout the economy. Restraints need to be put on wage increases of excessive magnitude because if such large wage increases became a general pattern they would build up excessive inflationary pressure on the consumer side. In addition while they might not require price increases in some strongly situated industries they would when generalized require price increases in many other industries. Thus in allowing productivity gains certain safeguards merit consideration. In the first place some limits should be set upon the size of these arrangements and effort should be made to relate them to realistic appraisal of the amount of lowered unit labor costs. In the second place more leadership and effort should be directed not only toward providing just reward for increased productivity but also toward doing everything possible to achieve increased productivity. Both labor and management can make great contributions toward this end. The Government may legitimately encourage them to do so when the national need is imperative and when the Government in the course of a wage stabilization program is being asked to allow incentives toward this end. In the third place so long as there can not be a general expansion of consumer goods a policy of allowing productivity gains should be combined with efforts to stimulate voluntary plans for translating at least a portion of these increments of income into savings rather than into immediate spending. The possibilities along this line have been very inadequately explored and much more vigor should be directed toward them Fourth the wage freeze of January generated a wide variety of inequities many of which have not yet been eliminated. Obviously the Wage Stabilization Board should seek to define types of inequities so that such situations can be dealt with promptly under uniform general policies However not all cases of hardship or inequity can be anticipated by general regulations. If the mandate of Congress is to be followed there must continue to be some independent appraisal unless the claims of hardship or inequity are to be summarily dismissed Fifth fringe benefits such as private pension plans should not be treated in the same category as wage increases because they do not result in an increase in take-home pay and consequently do not enlarge the immediate spending stream. They have the advantage of providing scope for collective bargaining which is limited in other respects under a stabilization program. However while fringe benefits do not add immediately to inflationary pressures on the consumer side they are not generally needed to stimulate production and consequently they should be held within a range where they do not add sufficiently to business costs to require price increases. This requires consideration not only of whether a particular business can grant fringe benefits without cost increases but also whether the general business area into which these fringe benefits are likely to expand quickly if started in one place can absorb them without price increases A wage policy along these general lines would cause total wage incomes to rise moderately during the next year or two during a period when goods available for consumer use can not be increased substantially because of the size of the defense program. But this disparity if it is not permitted to become excessive through too loose a wage policy should be corrected through appropriate tax policy and through inducements to voluntary saving. To try to handle the whole problem through an excessively restrictive wage policy would lose more by way of production incentives and worker morale than it would gain by way of stabilization. A balance must be struck between production and stabilization objectives between necessary restraint and necessary incentives There remains to be considered the question of whether a wage policy along these general lines would be consistent with reasonable price stability The answer to this question calls for analyzing separately the different phases of wage policy. Productivity increases surrounded by the general safeguards suggested above and held in the neighborhood of the average productivity gain for the economy as a whole should be capable of absorption without price increases in most industries. That is the meaning of a genuine productivity gain. Fringe benefits as has been indicated should be held to a size that can be covered by business earnings without price increases ; if the cost of private pension plans and similar devices needs to be passed on to the general consumer then it would be better to finance such protection through taxes and embody it in the public social security system. Cost of living adjustments are required for reasons of fairness whether or not they involve price increases ; but if the cost of living line is held this problem should not be substantial. In the case of wage adjustments to correct inequities and substandards of living or draw manpower into essential production these actions need to be taken whether or not they necessitate price increases. In these instances if properly administered the necessity for the wage increases to help the economy to function efficiently outweighs the desirability of absolute and inflexible price stability. In general if price increases are granted only where earnings are inadequate to stimulate production and are not granted automatically whenever certain cost increases occur the pursuit of the general wage policy indicated above would be consistent with the achievement of the price stabilization policy previously discussed The Council is fully aware of the difficult administrative and policy issues which have thus far prevented the development and enunciation of a rounded wage policy. The thorny issues confronting the Wage Stabilization Board should not be minimized Allowing for this the Council feels that the further clarification of wage policies toward which the Wage Stabilization Board is moving is in the best interests of labor management and the general public. It would protect workers from the popular misimpression that wage stabilization is being undermined whenever there are departures from early regulations which were not intended to be a complete or durable wage policy. It would afford management a greater sense of stability regarding the general contours of wage developments than is possible so long as each major case tends to be construed by a part of the public as a new wage policy outside of any central frame of reference. It would be helpful to the informed public by providing a complete statement of wage policies just as soon as it can be formulated Such a statement would not deprive the Wage Board of its ability to handle new and hard cases on a pragmatic basis. It would not stultify collective bargaining but on the contrary might make clearer the ambits within which collective bargaining can make a great contribution to the defense effort. It might even leave more play for collective bargaining than is now the case by highlighting a few ground rules consistent with stabilization. The development of such a statement would not even prevent changes in wage policies whenever new experience or altered conditions dictated the need. In a full-scale war wage stabilization may command a degree of public support which permits each new case to be handled on a purely ad hoc basis. But wage stabilization in a partial mobilization does not automatically command that degree of public support. It can win that support only if it makes clear to the public at large the underlying reasons for what it is doing and the soundness of these reasons in terms of the well-being of the economy as a whole. In the judgment of the Council there is no way short of a rounded and defined statement on wage policies to accomplish this vital objective Savings programs The degree of inflationary pressure that results from an excess of disposable income over the available volume of goods depends largely on the rate of voluntary personal saving. In general the higher the rate of saving the less the inflationary pressure. The form in which accumulations of personal savings are held is also important. If savings are invested in homes or in the physical assets of businesses they become a source of demand much as if they had been spent on consumer goods The fraction of his income that an individual will save depends on various personal and social factors. Judging from past experience if the proper atmosphere of price stability is maintained campaigns to promote additional saving can have considerable effect in increasing the savings of certain groups and accordingly the total amount of saving. The rate of saving is also increased by shortages of some goods and by various kinds of direct controls. A higher rate of personal savings which results from this cause does not in itself reduce inflationary pressure ; it merely measures or reflects the success of the controls. It is particularly important that such savings be converted into savings bonds or similar assets to hold down their future inflationary potential Some types of assets are more liquid than others ; and it is desirable that as large a part of additions to saving as possible be converted into those types of financial assets which are least likely to be converted into demand for goods in the short run. Savings bonds are an especially suitable form of investment for this purpose particularly since there is an incentive in the form of a gradually increasing effective rate of interest to hold these bonds to maturity. The campaign to promote the sale of United States savings bonds to individuals particularly through payroll deduction plans should be accordingly broadened and intensified. Bond campaigns add to total saving and serve to convert holdings of money into less liquid assets Credit controls by holding down the growth of consumer credit can contribute to a high net rate of personal saving. Moreover repayments of previously incurred debt also contribute since a decrease in the volume of total consumer credit is made possible in most cases by less spending out of current income that is by positive saving The world-wide problem of inflation and stabilization It was pointed out early in this Review that in the past year the price inflation generated by the rise in world demand has gone much further in most other countries than in the United States. ( This fact is shown in table and in appendix table B-27. ) In Western European countries increases in wholesale prices since the Korean outbreak are in out of cases percent or more and in they are percent or more. This contrasts with percent in the United States. Because the economies of TABLE Range of wholesale price increases in foreign countries since June Number of countries in range Range of percentage increases Total Oto9 to to to and over Western All other Europe To the latest date for which data are available Source : Appendix table B-27 these countries have been under great strain and because in some of them the political and social situation is tense inflation raises not only the question of equitable distribution of the economic burden of defense ; it also raises the grave question of the ability of their governments to carry through the needed defense programs and maintain political stability Similar questions affecting political stability and the security of the free world also arise from the acute inflations in some of the countries outside Western Europe This whole complex of questions is one of our major national security problems. The President 's request for economic aid for foreign countries is designed to take it into account. The foreign aid program however can alleviate only the worst of the strains on the economies of countries receiving aid. Even with it these countries will remain subject to intense inflationary pressures. In many of them the rise in domestic prices has substantially exceeded the rise in the prices of the goods they trade in world markets indicating that a considerable element of the inflation has been of domestic origin even though it may have been set off by events which occurred outside. But in many other countries the pressure comes mainly from world prices which they are powerless individually to control by purely domestic policies. It should be realized that in many countries for example most of those in Western Europe the value of merchandise imports or exports prior to the post-Korean price rise amounted to between one-fifth and two-fifths of their gross national products. This contrasts with less than percent in the United States where the influence of prices for foreign-traded goods is much less important The main burden of dealing with these pressures must fall upon the individual countries themselves. In Western Europe the problem is particularly difficult because in nearly all cases the monetary inflation has been accompanied by a deterioration in the terms of trade which tends to reduce the supply of goods available for domestic use. Nearly all the Western European countries have taken action to restrict credit. In many of them tax revenues ( including local government and social insurance taxes ) already amount to about one-third of gross national product contrasted with about one-quarter in the United States. In some other cases tax administration constitutes so serious a problem that tax increases of a type which would not raise the cost of living and set off new wage demands might be ineffective, and the governments concerned are not in a position to solve the problem of administration quickly. These are the very countries which have suffered sustained and progressive declines in the value of money over a long period of time and in which consequently the public willingness to save ( in forms other than goods ) is weakest and the reaction of expectations of price rises is quickest In view of this difficult situation plus the fact that the basic problem is a general excess of world demand over supply anti-inflationary action by all free nations is desirable. The knowledge that other nations were engaging in similar action would give each nation greater confidence that its own efforts would not be futile. The United States can greatly assist in the success of such a free world effort. As by far the largest single consumer of the world 's production and the major importer of world-traded goods we can exert great influence upon inflationary pressures. If we do not only limited success can be attained by other nations. Thus international considerations greatly reinforce the already strong domestic need for vigorous anti-inflationary action. In addition to action by example the United States should exert its influence through international organizations and in any other ways it properly can to persuade others to take vigorous anti-inflationary action IV. Detailed Economic Developments During the First Half of After general control of prices and wages was ordered on January the forces of the free market were limited in dominating and directing the course of the economy. While consumers and businessmen have been but little restricted as yet in making their own choices as to the volume and direction of their expenditures and investments their decisions as to employment production ^ and investment are no longer based upon the expected normal effects of free market forces THE EXPANDING ECONOMY The measurement of the economy 's production in money terms is found in the estimate of the gross national product which is the sum of expenditures for personal consumption for private domestic investment for government purchases of goods and services and for net foreign investment. All of these items being money figures directly affected by changes in prices they must be recalculated in constant prices in order to derive an index of the volume of goods and services actually produced In the second half of rising prices and rapidly increasing production combined to accelerate the rapid increase in gross national product which accompanied the recovery from the recession of In the second quarter of gross national product in current prices rose to the record level of a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars. In the third quarter it sprang upward to billion and in the fourth quarter to billion. The rise in the first quarter of was almost equally rapid to billion and the estimate for the second quarter is billion. ( See appendix table B-l. ) About three-fifths of the increase in gross national product in the first quarter of was due to price changes. The real growth in the economy in that period was about percent. The estimated increase of about billion dollars in the annual rate of gross national product in the second quarter requires much smaller adjustment price changes having been much less rapid and a real growth in the neighborhood of percent is indicated. ( See appendix table B-3. ) CHART CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE Since mid I960,the civilian labor force has not increased,largely because men were being drawn into the armed forces. Nonagricultural employment has increased million from the first half of to the first half of while-agricultural employment has declined MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J Unemployment as a percent of civilian labor force,fallowed a declining trend from the February high of percent to a postwar low of percent in May PERCENT UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN L/XB OR FORCE T : V X X- ^ sb ; iltei ^ ix | : '. : : : : : % : x * sk ; : : i : : : j : : j : : jj : : v ; x1 * 3xfe : ' X : : : : : : X X ; V : : : : v ; X > ; ; X FJ v rn 7T | v : j '. ; | : v ! xj SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE i rl hl Ivf ; I : ; fX ; x ji : : ? : : 'I- ^ YEARS OF AGE AND OVER : : X T | v ! xl : J : fe : ) THE LABOR FORGE Employment There has been a considerable increase in employment and in the number of persons in our labor force since the Korean outbreak. In the first half of the total labor force including the armed services averaged about * million higher than in the first half of Only about /a percent more of the population years old and over were in the labor force in the first half of this year than in the first half of ( See chart and appendix table B-ll. ) Civilian employment averaged million in the first half of and reached a level of million in June which represents an increase of workers over June Since January of this year due mainly to the seasonal increases characteristic of agricultural employment civilian employment has increased million Nonagricultural employment after expanding rapidly in the last half of has been relatively stable. At an average level of million during the first months of nonagricultural employment was million higher than during the same period a year before. It is now at a level of million workers having increased in the first months of the year after which it remained steady. The rise from January to June was largely the result of a seasonal increase in construction Despite the increased demand for food and fibers agricultural employment has continued its long-run decline averaging lower during the first half of than in the comparable period a year before. In June about million persons were engaged in farm work this being a period of high seasonal farm employment. However this level is more than a million lower than in June The build-up of the armed services was the most significant development affecting the labor market during the first half of Although the total labor force expanded substantially because of continued increases in the armed forces the civilian labor force averaged million during the first half of about the same as in the first half of Despite the new labor market demands arising from mobilization there is not now a general manpower shortage although a few important labor market areas are tight. The most pressing manpower problem arises out of shortages that prevail in certain key skilled occupations notably those in metal-working industries. There are also serious shortages within the professions of doctors dentists and nurses and many kinds of scientists and engineers Manufacturing employment averaged million higher during the first months of than in the first months of both durable and nondurable goods industries showing increases. The larger increase was during the second half of The smaller gains this year which brought total CHART CHANGES IN NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT The largest increases in employment during the past year were in durable goods manufacturing in contract construction and in government. Employment increased much less in nondurable goods industries and in finance and service and declined in mining PERCENT CHANGE JUNE I960 TO JUNE -HO DURABLE GOODS MANUFACTURING CONTRACT CONSTRUCTION GOVERNMENT TRANSPORTATION AND PUBLIC UTILITIES FINANCE AND SERVICE NONDURABLE GOODS MANUFACTURING TRADE MINING SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR manufacturing employment to a level of million persons in June have been almost entirely confined to industries manufacturing durables. Employment in contract construction during the first half of was higher than a year ago and employment was up the same amount in trade Government employment exceeded the level during the comparable period last year by ( See appendix table B-12 and chart ) There was a considerable lengthening of the average workweek during the second half of During early however changes became very irregular. From June the average workweek in manufacturing industries increased from hours to in December and then dropped to in January. During the first half of it remained close to that level Hours in duarble and nondurable manufacturing showed contrary trends While average hours in durable manufacturing varied between and a week during the first half of indicating that a considerable amount of overtime was being worked hours in nondurable manufacturing declined from hours a week in January to during June. ( See appendix table B-13. ) In contrast to the overtime scheduled in some industries about million persons were working less than hours a week in February However the majority of these were employed part-time through choice Only about million persons with full-time jobs were on reduced work schedules because of economic factors. Pointing up the vast improvement in the general labor market situation over the past year the proportion in this part-time group who were working shorter hours because of cutbacks resulting from declines in business activity dropped to percent in February of from percent in November and percent in February On the other hand roughly percent of the group working parttime in February because of economic reasons were on reduced hours because of material shortages compared with around percent in the same period of Unemployment The increase in employment in the first half of this year over the first half of was made possible primarily through a reduction of unemployment rather than by net additions to the civilian labor force. During the first months of last year unemployment averaged almost million. It averaged only slightly over million during the first months of this year a reduction of almost million in the number of unemployed. In May unemployment at million had reached its lowest postwar level There was however a seasonal increase in June mostly students hunting for summer jobs which brought the total number of persons unemployed to almost million. ( See chart and appendix table B-l ) There have been some instances of unemployment resulting from conversion to defense production although to date none has developed on a large scale. In most cases displaced workers have had no difficulty in finding other jobs. With unemployment at its present low level and new jobs continuing to open up conversion unemployment should not reach serious proportions In addition to the decline in unemployment from the first half of to the first half of there have been important changes in the duration of unemployment. In June the average duration of unemployment for those persons who reported they were unemployed at the time of the survey was weeks. In June the average duration was weeks. In the first half of about percent of the unemployed reported that they had been without work for weeks or less ; in the first half of almost percent of the unemployed had been without work for weeks or less. The " hard core " of unemployment also declined : in the first half of percent had been without work for weeks or more but in the first half of less than percent had been without work that long Unemployment compensation claims reflected the drop in unemployment. From a weekly average of around initial claims in June they dropped to about in June Total weeks of unemployment claimed dropped by almost percent from June to June In June they averaged about a week but in June the weekly average was around PRODUCTION The total output of goods and services ( i. e. the gross national product corrected for changes in prices ) reached record postwar levels in the first half of and was about equal to the peak war year of ( See chart page ) CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION After rising sharply throughout the total index of industrial production was stationary from April through June of this year INDEX s INDEX * ~ too nn I i i i i i \ J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Industrial production The index of industrial production which was in June ( = ) four points higher than the highest level reached in dropped to in July and then advanced rapidly as business was invigorated by the pressures of semimobilization policies. It reached in December ; and in January the advance to marked continued substantial progress in economic expansion. After remaining at that level in February the index rose to in March and to in April where it remained for months. ( See appendix table B-17 and chart ) The stability of industrial production since March reflects a combination of three factors affecting various industries. Some industries had reached practical capacity and could expand only slowly. Some were affected by restrictions on the use of metals. Finally some industries were unable to find markets for greater output Table compares the May output of several industries with peaks reached since the beginning of The particular industries listed in table were selected because trade comments suggest that the decline in output in these cases probably was due to the inventory situation or to a weakness in current demand rather than to a shortage of raw materials TABLE Output of selected industries May compared with peak [ = adjusted for seasonal variation ] peak May Industry Index Furniture _ Cotton consumption Rayon deliveries Carpet wool consumption Apparel wool consumption Shoes Confectionery Malt liquor Whisky Cigars BitnTTifnniis f ^ O ^ l Anthracite coal _-- _ _ _ _ _ U38 U57 U28 Month October _ March December _ October October September August January March _._ March January March Percentage decline from peak to May i April data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Irregular increases were registered in the durable goods sector through the first quarter of this year. The expansion occurred chiefly in those industries producing directly or indirectly for the defense program. Producers of machinery continued to increase their output sharply. The iron and steel industry produced at record levels while continuing to add to productive capacity. Production of two other basic metals aluminum and copper increased. In the first quarter of this year primary production of aluminum was about percent above the average for The industry produced at the full capacity of active plants and productive capacity was being increased through reactivation of plants used in the last war as well as through new investment. Output of refined copper showed a limited increase with production percent higher than in The aircraft and shipbuilding industries continued to expand rapidly Freight car production increased from a level of cars in December to about in March. In the second quarter the volume of production had reached the level of current capacity in some of the basic industries Output of machinery of nonferrous metals and of iron and steel has remained about stable since March Consumers ' durable goods production generally has fallen considerably since the beginning of In the first quarter most consumer durable goods industries although at a high level of production were below the peak levels of output of the second half of when the upsurge of consumer demand pushed production to record highs. In the second quarter there were cutbacks in the output of most major products the largest decline being in television sets The total output of nondurable goods has declined somewhat since the beginning of the year. There has been a steady rise in the output of chemicals and allied products largely synthetic rubber and industrial chemicals under the impetus of defense needs. Output of textiles however has fallen in part as a result of strikes in the industry in the spring and also because of easing of consumer demand Average output of minerals in the first half of showed a small rise from the second half of Crude petroleum production has been at record levels with output at over barrels a day since early April. The mining of iron copper and zinc has also increased Output of electric power has been well above last year but in the second quarter of the margin of increase over fell below that of the first part of the year Agricultural production Domestic supplies of foods in the coming year will probably be at least as great as those of last year and fully adequate to meet normal requirements. The problem is the unusually high demand for meats and other relatively expensive foods. A further increase above the already high levels of meat production would either reduce our feed supplies or require an expansion of feed production The July crop report indicates that prospects for crops improved greatly since the previous month. The total planted acreage is the largest since and present indications are that yields may be among the largest in recent years. The wheat crop is expected to be well over billion bushels and greater than the crop of last year. The corn prospects are especially good present indications pointing to a crop of billion bushels compared to billion bushels last year. Cotton acreage this year is percent greater than last year 's small acreage and is almost a million acres more than called for in the agricultural guides Services Personal expenditures ( corrected for price changes ) for services rose about ll/2 percent from the second half of to the first half of This compares with an increase of over percent from the first to the second half of ( See appendix table B-3. ) PRICES The year opened on a floodtide of price increases resulting from heavy buying that followed the Chinese intervention. The rise was almost as rapid as that which occurred in July following the first outbreak in Korea and it spread more generally through the price structure. To halt the upsurge a general price freeze was imposed on January By midFebruary prices had leveled off ; and while there were moderate uptrends in some markets and downtrends in others they remained remarkably stable for the next 2/2 months. In the second quarter some easing in prices developed as consumer spending dipped moderately and as businessmen became concerned about the rate of accumulation of inventories Since Korea the major movements in prices have been as follows : from June to the issuance of the General Ceiling Price Regulation in January consumers ' prices rose percent ; the monthly index of wholesale prices rose percent ; the daily price index of " sensitive " primary market commodities rose percent. From the issuance of GCPR to midyear wholesale prices rose percent and prices of primary market commodities showed a net drop of percent ; and from January to May consumers ' prices rose percent The inauguration of controls Between mid-December and mid-February the average price increase for the basic commodities covered in the daily primary market price index was percent. During the same period the all-commodity wholesale price index rose percent. Among its components wholesale farm prices increased percent wholesale foods percent and wholesale industrial prices percent. The consumers ' price index rose almost percent between December and February ( See charts and ) The pace of price inflation during December and January forced the decision for an early price freeze. The General Ceiling Price Regulation although containing certain exemptions primarily in the case of farm commodities froze most prices in the economy at the highest levels at which deliveries had been made between December and January As the first general step since Korea in a mandatory control program ( automobiles had been controlled earlier ) GCPR was unprecedentedly broad in its coverage While the institution of price controls was a major factor in halting the rise in prices in February there were other important factors at work : the improvement in the military situation in Korea ; the delay in cutting back the production of consumer durable goods and the consequent continuing ample supply of civilian goods ; the record Government cash surplus during the first quarter ; and the credit restrictions Since January the Office of Price Stabilization has been mainly concerned with building an organization and with shifting away from the stop-gap freeze to regulations designed to iron out the more serious distortions and inequities which were frozen into the price structure by GGPR Wholesale prices under controls Although most prices were frozen late in January the price advance continued until mid-February primarily because of increases in the areas left uncontrolled mainly agricultural products. But the control of other prices exerted a stabilizing effect on these prices also. ( See appendix table B-25. ) TABLE Changes in wholesale prices Percentage change Korean outKorean break to Gen- General Ceiling Price eral Ceiling outbreak to Price Regu- Regulation to June June lation i Commodity group All commodities Farm products Grains ._ Livestock, Foods _ Meats Other than farm products and foods Hides and leather products Textile products Fuel and lighting materials Metals and metal products Building materials __ Chemicals and allied products Housefurnishing goods..Miscellaneous ._ __ _ _ _ +5/5 i June used for date of Korean outbreak and January used for General Ceiling Price Regulation Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table B-25. ) Wholesale prices of farm products more volatile than other domestic prices during the first half of rose percent between December and February as livestock prices increased sharply. Eventually with livestock prices up even more but grains down farm prices reached a peak one-half percent higher in March. Their course then became uneven but slightly downward and at midyear they were at a level percent above that of January. ( See chart and table ) Farm prices rose somewhat more than nonfarm prices immediately following GGPR because farm products below parity in price are exempt from price control under the Defense Production Act when sold in raw CHART WHOLESALE PRICES Wholesale prices reached a peak in the first quarter. In the second quarter farm and industrial prices declined with the larger drop in farm prices ; food prices fluctuated within a moderate range INDEX = I N D E X * J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J / PERCENTAGE CHANGES DECREASE INCREASE ALL COMMODITIES FARM PRODUCTS FOODS OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS ) _ ! /PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS EXCEPT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ( E X C E P T AS NOTED ) FOR TOTAL or unprocessed form. At the time GCPR was issued most of the major farm commodities with the exception of cotton wool soybeans and livestock were selling below their parity prices. Furthermore prices of farm commodities selling above parity were not included in the GCPR pending the issuance of special regulations. As a practical matter the freeze technique of price control is not a very workable or effective one for most farm marketings. Accordingly OPS has applied specific dollars-and-cents ceilings at the farm level on several commodities where effective control is particularly required. The more important actions have affected cotton wool and soybeans. Control of producers ' prices has been approximated in the case of cattle where average buying prices have been established for beef packers In their relation to parity farm prices moved over a wide range in the first half of After reaching an all-time high of ( = ) in February the Department of Agriculture 's index of prices received by farmers dropped by June to The index of prices paid by farmers meanwhile rose gradually during the first months of the year and remained unchanged during May and June. The parity ratio relating to these two indexes which moved above immediately after the Korean outbreak reached a post-Korean peak of in February and by June had declined to ( See appendix table B-26. ) There were wide variations among commodities. Thus beef cattle wool cotton and lambs continued well above parity. Rice butterfat and hogs were very close to parity Some farm commodities were considerably below it Wholesale food prices registered a net increase of percent in the first half of and at midyear were percent above their GCPR level. They reached a high in February about percent above the December level and have not regained that point since. Wholesale meat prices the single most important and from the point of view of control the most critical element in the food group jumped percent between December and February but thereafter fluctuated in a relatively narrow range The markets which the wholesale index covers contain several production and distribution levels and since the price controls now developed are roughly adapted to particular levels there is no single pattern of controls in the " wholesale food " area. For those foods which move directly from the farmer to the consumer without processing what is said above about the control of farm prices applies. With the exception of those processing industries which have since been removed from GCPR and subjected to other regulations food processing is subject to the general freeze with provision for a dollars-and-cents pass-through of any increases in farm prices which were below parity at the time of the freeze. Among the exceptions the selling prices of beef packers have since May been subject to dollars-and-cents ceilings. In addition producers of nonseasonal ( mostly dry ) groceries are to be subject to the General Manufacturers ' CHART WHOLESALE PRICES OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS Industrial prices reached a peak in the first quarter. In the second quarter declines occurred in prices of textiles chemicals hides and leather and building materials. Metal prices generally stayed at about their ceilings INDEX = I N D E X > I O O O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M j l / J F M A M J J A S O N D J J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D | J F M A M J J A S O N D ] J F M A M J V M- ALL COMMODITIES OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS ! /PRELIMINARY E S T I M A T E S BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S SOURCE.DEPARTMENT OF L A B O R ( E X C E P T AS NOTED ) Regulation when it goes into effect. Wholesale food distribution still partly under GCPR is now subject to a few dollars-and-cents ceilings the major case being that of beef. The principal technique of control at this level since April however has been that of fixed percentage mark-ups as specified by OPS. Such margins which approximate those established by OP A during World War II are differentiated by type of wholesaler Industrial prices in the first half of while following the same pattern as the other wholesale price groups have been the least volatile. They rose percent between December and February and rose fractionally in March. Thereafter they were in a slow and steady decline dropping about percent during the second quarter. Among the industrial commodity groups the prices of metals and metal products have been extremely stable throughout the half year. Building materials and fuel and lighting materials rose moderately in the first quarter and declined slightly in the second ; textile and allied products rose briskly during the first quarter and have dropped moderately since ; and chemicals and allied products have been subject to considerable price fluctuations mainly because of variations in prices of fats and oils. ( See chart ) The general price behavior of raw materials is more clearly indicated by the limited daily index of primary market commodities than by the overall wholesale index because the latter covers successive processing and distributive levels. Just as the daily index far outstripped the other measures of price inflation from last June to February ^ so it has been the most emphatic in recording the downward tone of prices since that time. Since February the prices of the " sensitive " primary market commodities have dropped on the average about percent The pattern of price control of manufactured commodities was to be set by the General Manufacturers ' Regulation issued in late April and was to have been effective in July. This pattern was followed in similar regulations which have been issued for the machinery cotton and wool textiles apparel and shoe manufacturing industries. The objective of these regulations is by sweeping action to remove the principal distortions and inequities of the general freeze by restoring the same relationships between manufacturers ' costs for labor and manufacturing materials on the one hand and on the other the prices which existed in the pre-Korea base period. However at midyear the application of these regulations was suspended pending renewal of the Defense Production Act Consumers3 prices under controls In the three months ended February consumers ' prices rose at an average rate of percent monthly. As with the other price indexes the trend of the consumers ' price index changed at this point. From midFebruary to mid-March it advanced percent ; from March to April there was virtually no change ; and in May consumers ' prices again rose percent mainly as the result of seasonal movements in some fresh CHART CONSUMERS ' PRICES Consumers ' prices continued to reach new record levels in the first half of but since the institution of price controls the rise has been very moderate. Rents maintained their postwar rate of increase INDEX INDEX = ~ J60 J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J PERCENTAGE CHANGES DECREASE INCREASE KOREAN OUTBREAK TO GCPR ALL ITEMS | ; ] Q G P R TO MAY I9SI KOREAN OUTBREAK TO MAY SI FOOD APPAREL RENT ^ PERCENTAGE CHANGE TO JUNE SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR fruit and vegetable prices. On May consumers ' prices as a whole were percent higher than they were in January before the general freeze. ( See table ) Retail food prices which had dipped slightly in April were percent above the January level ; apparel prices were up percent ; and housefurnishings prices were up percent. Rents in May were percent higher than in January ; there was little change in the charges to consumers for fuel and public utilities. Preliminary estimates indicate that from May to June retail food prices declined percent ( See chart and appendix table B-24. ) TABLE Changes in consumers ' prices Percentage change Korean General outbreak Ceiling to General Price ReguCeiling Price lation to Regulation May Item Korean outbreak to May _ Food Apparel Rent Fuel electricity and refrigeration Housefurnishings Miscellaneous..- All items _ _ _ _ June used for date of Korean outbreak and January used for General Ceiling Price Regulation Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table B-24. ) Retail trade in the first half of and particularly in the second quarter was marked by the most aggressive merchandising since the Korean outbreak. Retailers especially in the consumers * durable goods area resorted more extensively to liberal discount and trade-in policies and to clearance sales in order to move their heavy inventories. Much of such " effective " price reduction it should be noted is not fully reflected by the consumers ' price index. The most dramatic instance of aggressive merchandising was the price war among New York City department stores touched off in late May by a decision of the United States Supreme Court which opened a big hole in the State price maintenance laws. In New York City where before this episode department store sales had approximated levels sales jumped to percent above the preceding year 's level in the first week of the " war " and continued to show a considerable bulge during the first half of June even after the price slashing had largely subsided By midyear most sectors of retail trade had been withdrawn from the General Ceiling Price Regulation and were in most cases subject to price controls of the percentage mark-up variety. This was true of the majority of goods that may be roughly characterized as the " department store type/ ' of most dry groceries and some perishable foods at retail and of restaurant prices. Beef was the only major retail commodity subject to a dollars-and-cents ceiling. Most building materials farm implements retail services and some other categories were still subject to the December 19January freeze prescribed by GGPR WAGES The first half of saw an abatement of the most rapid upward movement of wages and salaries in the postwar period. Labor income ( wages salaries and other labor income ) which reached the annual rate of billion dollars in the final quarter of after rising billion in months rose over billion to a rate of billion in the second quarter of The customary indicators of wage earnings show a slow-down in the rate of increase. From July to December average hourly earnings in manufacturing increased by over cents an hour ; from January to June they increased by almost cents an hour with earnings in durable goods industries advancing by % cents an hour. ( See chart and appendix table B-14. ) While hourly earnings in all manufacturing industries continue to rise in real terms ( as measured by changes in the consumers ' price index ) they increased by only l/ cents between January and June Real hourly earnings in durable goods industries rose almost cents while real earnings in nondurable goods remained constant The rate of increase in weekly earnings was also slower in Average weekly earnings in all manufacturing industries increased by almost $ between July and December but by about $ between January and June Weekly earnings of workers in durable goods manufacturing increased by almost $ during the first half of chiefly as a result of wage rate increases. Earnings of workers in nondurable goods manufacturing rose by only cents during the same period ; the reason was the drop of almost hour in average weekly hours during which largely offset wage increases. ( See appendix table B-15. ) Real weekly earnings rose by about cents in all manufacturing between January and June In terms of real wages weekly earnings in durable goods industries were more than $ higher in June than in January but real weekly earnings in nondurable goods industries dropped by $ between January and June Wage stabilization The pattern of wage negotiations during the first half of was greatly influenced by the actions of the Wage Stabilization Board. Almost every wage negotiation was conducted with an eye toward the Board 's regulatory actions whether the regulations had already been issued or were merely anticipated CHART WAGES AND HOURS ALL MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Average hourly earnings for all manufacturing industries rose throughout and thus far in Since January the average workweek has decreased. Average w e e k l y earnings increased very slightly DOLLARS ( PRODUCTION AND RELATED W O R K E R S ) DOLLARS J F M A M J J A S O SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR N D J F M A M J During the period immediately preceding the wage freeze an unusually high number of wage settlements took place. It is estimated that at least manufacturing workers and probably twice that number in nonmanufacturing and government employment received increases during the month before the freeze. In many instances formal reopening dates or termination dates were advanced in order to negotiate settlements before the anticipated freeze. The terms of the settlements varied considerably ; in some cases provisions for future adjustments in the form of cost-of-living escalator clauses or deferred increases were included in the contracts On January the Economic Stabilization Administrator issued General Wage Stabilization Regulation No. which froze wages salaries and other compensation at the level prevailing on January and provided that no wage rate at a higher level could be paid without prior approval of the Wage Stabilization Board. Following the issuance of Regulation No the Board issued a series of clarifying regulations which ( ) exempted from the freeze agreements reached before January which were to take effect within days ; ( ) exempted actions raising wage rates in order to comply with minimum wage regulations ; ( ) exempted employees of nonFederal government units from Federal wage controls ; and ( ) clarified the status of merit increases and incentive pay under wage stabilization On February the Economic Stabilization Administrator issued General Regulation No. It provides that those workers who had not yet received wage increases of percent over the level of January may be permitted increases in wage and fringe benefits up to percent. For the purpose of determining whether the increases already received by workers equal percent fringe benefits negotiated prior to January are to be excluded. The Regulation also directs that consideration be given to granting wage increases in " rare and unusual " cases ( those in which wage incentives are needed to attract labor to defense industry ) and in situations where inequities exist. Regulation No. which was issued on March provides that cost-of-living clauses contained in contracts executed on or before January will b allowed to continue in operation even if the percent limitation is exceeded as a result. The Board has also issued a regulation pertaining to the establishment of wage scales in new plants and so-called " tandem wage increases " which occur when wage rates in one type of work or plant consistently follow a pattern established elsewhere. These regulations are modified by two others. Wage increases granted to employees of religious charitable and educational institutions are permitted without Wage Board approval. The Board also in effect exempted the majority of farm workers from wage controls by providing that farm wages may be increased up to a level of cents an hour without Board approval The Economic Stabilization Administrator has established a five-man board of public members to develop a stabilization policy affecting compensation of executive administrative professional and certain sales and supervisory employees. In general the authority of the board extends to the salaries of employees who are exempt from the overtime-work provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act The Wage Stabilization Board has been confronted with a series of major cases in which both employers and employees agreed to wage increases and then petitioned the Wage Stabilization Board for approval In the first and one of the most significant of wage cases the Wage Stabilization Board decided in mid-May to allow the meat-packing workers a 9-cent increase of which the major part was in excess of the 10-percent formula. These workers had received wage increases of cents an hour during The Board held that it would not be fair to penalize the parties to the agreement because they used a broad form of reopening clause rather than a cost-of-living provision. Later an additional cents was allowed for bracket adjustments In late May and in June the Board made several important decisions. In early June the Board gave the go-ahead signal for increases provided in productivity or " annual improvement " clauses in contracts typical of the automobile industry by ruling that payment of a scheduled 4-cent increase would be permissible even when it exceeded the percent ceiling if the increase could be granted without an accompanying price increase. Most automobile companies announced that their workers would receive the increase. On June an over-ceiling wage increase of percent was approved for Atlantic Coast shipbuilding workers on the grounds that shipbuilding wage rates were abnormally low in the base period. On June an increase of cents an hour was approved for Westinghouse workers under the " tandem " provision In this case the standard for the 9-cent increase had been set by the General Electric Company in March Work stoppages Both the number of work stoppages beginning during the first months of and the number of workers involved were higher than in the comparable period of However man-days of idleness resulting from stoppages were considerably less during this period in than in From January through May there were about million man-days of idleness or percent of estimated working time in all industries. During the same period in idleness amounted to percent of working time or about million man-days were lost as the result of work stoppages PROFITS After rising steadily through and reaching unprecedented levels in the first quarter of the trend of profits was moderately downward in the second quarter. In the second quarter of corporate book profits before taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) were running at an estimated annual rate of billion dollars compared with CHART CORPORATE PROFITS Corporate profits before taxes reached an all-time peak in the first quarter and declined moderately in the second quarter of this year. Profits after taxes have declined since the fourth quarter of I950 ; reflecting the full effects of the new tax rates BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ^ NO A L L O W A N C E FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT ^ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( E X C E P T AS NOTED ) billion a year earlier and with the peak rate of billion in the first quarter of ( See chart ) There was a somewhat sharper decline in corporate profits after taxes since they reflected the full effects of the higher corporate taxes passed in In the second quarter of corporate profits after taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) were running at an estimated annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion a year earlier and with the peak rate of billion in the fourth quarter of The second quarter profits after taxes represented almost percent on sales and over J4 percent on net worth compared with almost percent and almost percent respectively a year ago The net income of nonagricultural unincorporated business and the professions has since mid-1950 moved in a much less regular fashion than corporate profits. After reaching a peak in the third quarter of the net income of this group declined in the fourth quarter and then rose again to a new peak in the first quarter of It declined sharply in the second quarter when it was running at an estimated billion dollars before taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) This compares with billion a year earlier and with the peak rate of billion in the first quarter of The net income of farm proprietors moved steadily and sharply upward since the Korean outbreak in response to the higher level of farm prices and increased marketings. In the second quarter of net income of farm proprietors before taxes was at an estimated annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion a year ago a rise of billion or percent. The peak had been reached in the second quarter of when farm income was at an annual rate of billion dollars The shifting trends in the economy which marked most of the last months and the differential impact of the growing security program were reflected in the divergent profit trends by industries. During the first quarter of substantial increases in profits before taxes were reported by the following manufacturing industries : fabricated metal products machinery paper and allied products chemicals and petroleum The largest declines were reported by producers of electrical machinery transportation equipment and motor vehicles and parts From first quarter data it appears that small manufacturers ( those with assets less than million ) fared relatively as well as large concerns on a before-tax basis but somewhat better on an after-tax basis. In general the excess profits tax now in effect has a greater impact on larger than upon smaller firms The current rate of profits provides in general ample inducement to expand output and capacity. In spite of the large increase in corporate taxes the current level of profits continues to be almost as large a source of funds as in any previous period. In the first half of the net availability of funds from profits after allowing for corporate taxes and changes in the cost of replacing inventories was at an annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion in the first half of and with billion in the second half. ( Appendix tables B-34 through B-38 give details on profits. ) MONEY AND CREDIT Money supply Total money supply including Government deposits with Federal Reserve banks and commercial and savings banks which had increased billion dollars during the first half of and billion during the second half or a total of about percent for the year rose only about billion during the first half of The expansion of loans and investments of the entire banking system including Federal Reserve bank holdings of Government securities which had the effect of lifting the money supply was in part offset by other factors mainly a substantial gold outflow during the first quarter. ( See appendix table B-30. ) In the first quarter of the privately-held supply of money ( adjusted demand and time deposits including those of governments other than Federal and currency outside of banks ) declined from billion dollars to billion. The weekly index of wholesale prices rose from to in the same period and the index of consumers ' prices advanced from in mid-December to in mid-March. Both the drop in money supply and the rise in consumers ' prices were exceptionally rapid The opposite direction of changes in money supply and changes in prices in the first quarter of was an illustration of the uncertain relationship between the two in short periods. This phenomenon appeared repeatedly in quarter-year and half-year periods between July and July At the close of money supply was billion dollars and it stood below that level throughout the ensuing months of inflationary price advance. In the meantime the index of wholesale prices rose from to and the index of consumers ' prices advanced from to A decline in the privately-held money supply is a characteristic of the first quarter of the year particularly since World War II. The concentration of income tax payments in the first quarter has required heavy transfer from private deposits in banks to Treasury account. In the first months of when Federal cash receipts exceeded expenditures by billion dollars the reduction in private bank deposits was exceptionally heavy With the conclusion of March tax payments the privately-held money supply began to increase rising by about billion dollars in April billion in May and billion in June. Price advances which had persisted in the first quarter despite the decrease in money supply gave way to relative stability in price after March during a period when the money supply expanded Credit During the first half of the major kinds of private credit outstanding after months in which all had been carried upward were subject to a complex of forces that resulted in widely divergent changes Credit restraints direct controls of prices wages and materials the rising credit needs of defense industries seasonal factors and the subsidence of anticipatory demand were responsible for changes in the pace and even in the direction of movement of the several classes of credit Total loans of commercial banks rose nearly billion dollars or about percent between December and June compared with CHART BANK LOANS AND INVESTMENTS At midyear total commercial bank loans and investments were about at the December I960 level. A decline in bank holdings of U.S Government securities during the first six months of was offset by an increase in loans and investment in other securities BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I960 ! END OF MONTH SOURCE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM billion dollars or percent during the same period a year before. During the second half of total loans expanded billion or about percent. However total earnings assets of commercial banks showed no change between the end of and mid-1951 as the growth of loans and a moderate increase in investment in other securities were offset by a decline in holdings of Government obligations. ( See chart and appendix table B-29. ) The changes in total bank loans since Korea largely reflected the behavior of commercial and industrial loans. Business loans declined CHART CONSUMER CREDIT Consumer credit outstanding declined during the first half of almost as much as it had expanded during the first half of Both charge accounts and instalment credit have dropped since December BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS TOTAL CONSUMER CREDIT V OTHER CONSUMER CREDIT J F M A M J J A S O N o l j F M A M J J A S O N o l j F M A M J J A S O N D l j F M A M j i / END OF MONTH SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) about million dollars or less than percent during the first half of ; jumped nearly billion dollars or percent during the second half ; and rose nearly billion or about percent during the first half of Seasonal declines are usual during the first months of the year and normally attain their maximum rate during the second quarter. There was no seasonal fall during the first half of as a whole because increased borrowing especially by defense industries more than offset the effect of seasonal repayments. Business loans expanded during the first quarter declined slightly between March and May and resumed their climb in June Outstanding farm mortgage loans of all lenders which had risen about percent during continued to increase during the first half of though at a somewhat reduced rate. Nonfarm residential mortgage credit continued to rise during the first months of at a rate greater than that of the same period of but substantially under that of the second half of Credit restrictions have operated to slow down the rate of growth and the current trend would keep the total for the year well below the percent expansion of billion dollars during In contrast with other forms of private credit consumer credit outstanding showed a net decline in the first months of During the first half of consumer credit outstanding expanded billion dollars or percent ; during the second half it soared billion or nearly percent ; between December and June it dropped about billion or percent. The difference in the direction of movement of consumer credit comparing the first half of with the first half of is largely accounted for by the billion dollar expansion of instalment credit during the former period and the billion contraction during the later. ( See chart and appendix table B-28. ) FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER The substantial increase in the volume of production in the first half of lifted national income from the seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion in the second half of to billion in the first half of ( See appendix table B-6. ) Among the constituent elements of national income the one contributing most to the rise was compensation of employees which increased from an annual rate of billion in the final quarter of to billion in the first quarter of and to billion in the second quarter The increase in private payrolls was from billion to billion and to this there was added an increase from billion to billion in supplementary income from enlarged social security benefits and from expanding private pension programs. The largest proportionate increase was in government payrolls which expanded from an annual rate of billion to billion during the half-year as a result of the growth of the military forces and of civilian employment by the Federal Government under the defense program Corporate profits have been discussed above. After adjustment for the increase in costs of goods in inventories but before deduction for income taxes corporate profits increased from an annual rate of billion in the fourth quarter to billion in the first quarter. For the second quarter-year they are estimated at an annual rate of billion The other large constituent elements in national income are income of farm proprietors and professional and unincorporated business incomes Income of the latter group increased from an annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter to a rate of billion in the first quarter but it is estimated that it declined to billion in the second quarter Income of farm proprietors continued its advance which began following the Korean outbreak rising from an annual rate of billion in the second half of to billion in the first half of I87 Personal income Personal income the principal elements of which are wages and salaries interest profits of unincorporated businesses corporate dividends and government payments of social security and other benefits increased from an annual rate of billion dollars in the closing quarter of to billion in the first quarter of this year and to billion in the second quarter. Personal taxes which must be deducted from personal income in order to determine the volume of disposable personal income have increased greatly as the higher tax rates have become fully effective. In the first half of they rose to an annual rate of billion dollars compared with an annual rate of billion in the second half of The increase in Federal personal income taxes was from an annual rate of billion to a rate of billion. Notwithstanding this larger burden of income taxes disposable personal income climbed from an annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of to billion in the first quarter of and to billion in the second quarter. ( See chart and appendix tables B-7 through B-10. ) Personal consumption expenditures Consumers ' spending in the first half of repeated the phenomenon appearing in the second half of when spirited buying had little connection with changes in personal income and when in the closing months of the period the decline in the volume of buying was contrary to the direction of change in income. In each instance a wave of buying induced by emotional response to events outside the field of income buying power and markets brought about changes in prices which no forecast of income changes could have indicated. In each case the behavior of consumers generated forces of inflation which did not disappear when the surge of buying subsided In July it was the original outbreak in Korea which touched off heavy consumer buying largely directed to consumer durable goods which people believed might become very scarce when production was channeled into military equipment. The second surprising surge of consumer buying ( seasonally adjusted ) reached its crest in January after a holiday season of only moderately vigorous buying and more than weeks after the Chinese attack in Korea. It was probably due to popular disillusionment about the prospect of an early end to fighting in Korea following serious setbacks to United Nations ' forces The index of department store sales seasonally adjusted ( = ) rose from in May to in July and after receding climbed to the same level in January. The upward jump equally vigorous in each incident was each time followed by a sharp decline. The continued appearance on merchants ' shelves of abundant stocks of goods in each period allayed consumers ' fears of shortages but the course of decline in CHART PERSONAL INCOME Personal income in the second quarter of this year was billion dollars higher than in the same period last year. All components of income increased with the exception of transfer payments BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * ( SALARIES WAGES AND OTHER LABOR INCOME ) * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES I/OTHER INCOME CONSISTS OF RENTS,INTEREST AND DIVIDENDS ^ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) buying was more rapid in than in The department store index fell to in October and to in November after the July peak. After the January rush to it fell to in March. The general price control order issued late in January and the simultaneous improvement of the military situation in Korea were important factors in dissipating the popular mood which had led to buying in anticipation of higher prices and shortages of goods Brief as was the January buying surge it lifted the volume of personal consumption expenditures in the first quarter of to the record level of billion dollars ( annual rate ) compared with billion in the final quarter of The ensuing lull reflected a quiet market but not a receding market. The level of consumption expenditures was estimated to be at an annual rate of billion in the second quarter of the year ( See appendix tables B-4 and B-9. ) Personal saving In the estimates of national income the figure of personal saving differs from all others in that it is not estimated directly but is a residual figure which can not be checked against direct information until later. The principal uses to which personal saving is put are additions to liquid assets such as cash bank deposits and Government bonds ; additions to other securities ; increases in private insurance reserves ; investment in homes ; net repayments of indebtedness ; and increases in the physical assets of personal businesses and farms Current estimates of personal saving being residual figures of relatively small size are disproportionately distorted by small percentage errors in the estimates of the very large items of disposable personal income and consumers ' expenditures. They must be used with caution in an analysis of the economic situation and in formulating national economic policies The estimate of personal saving at the seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the first quarter places it well below the postwar peak of billion in the last quarter of In the second quarter of the year personal income increased and as the higher tax rates were not great enough to match the increase in income consumers ' disposable income also increased. The estimated decline in personal consumption expenditures left a residual amount of personal saving of billion dollars ( annual rate ) ( See appendix table B-9. ) While the estimate of the extraordinarily large increase in personal saving in the second quarter of must be accepted with reserve the importance of the conditions underlying the estimate must not be undervalued. Even with relative stability in wage rates in coming months the operation of the defense program will bring about a steady increase in personal income only a part of which will be taken by increased taxation If in the same period the limitations upon the supply of consumers ' goods stable prices combine to hold down consumers ' expenditures there will inevitably be an increase in personal saving. This was the situation which with the added influence of rationing accounted for the enormous saving during World War II. The present defense program will not affect consumer buying in the same degree but it will undoubtedly lead to a substantial increase in saving TABLE Liquid savings by individuals * [ Billions of dollars ~ not seasonally adjusted ] first quarter | Type of saving first quarter _ _ _ _ __ _ -__ Currency and bank deposits Savings and loan associations Private insurance reserves Securities : United States savings bonds Other U. S. Government State and local governments Corporate and other Liquidation of debt : Residential mortgage debt Other debt Q Total liquid saving i Includes saving of unincorporated businesses trust and pension funds and nonprofit institutions NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securitiesland Exchange Commission During the first quarter of the latest period for which data are available liquid saving by individuals decreased about billion dollars compared with an increase of about billion during the first quarter of As is shown in table the principal factor in the decline was an unusually large drop in holdings of currency and bank deposits reflecting heavy payments of personal income taxes BUSINESS INVESTMENT AND FINANCE During the first half of gross private domestic investment in construction equipment and additions to inventory rose to the all-time record level of billion dollars at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. This was an increase of percent from the first half of and percent from the second half. ( See chart and also appendix table B-5. ) These increases were more rapid than the growth of total national output. In the second quarter of gross private domestic investment absorbed percent of gross national product compared with percent a year earlier Most of the increase in total investment over the past year was accounted for by increases in purchases of producers ' equipment and by faster accumulation of business inventories. Residential construction outlays in the first half of were at substantially the first half of level while other construction rose percent At midyear outlays for plant and equipment were still rising under the impetus of a general demand for facilities expansion and the selective CHART BUSINESS INVESTMENT Gross private domestic investment,already at a record level just before Korea,has since risen rapidly. Equipment purchases and additions to inventory are at very high levels BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * NET CHANGE IN I BUSINESS INVENTORIES " S E A S O N A L L Y ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ^ P R E L I M I N A R Y ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S SOURCE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) stimulus of some urgently needed expansion programs. Inventory accumulation had not been halted but housing construction was falling off partly as a result of credit restrictions Plant and equipment Nonfarm business expenditures for new plant and equipment have continued on a rapidly rising trend during the past months. In the second quarter of the total volume of these outlays was at a new high nearly one-third above the corresponding quarter of ( See appendix tables B-5 and B-20. ) There have been marked differences in the behavior of the different major types of plant and equipment investment since Korea. Although the desire to expand and improve facilities has been intense in all sectors the greatest acceleration has occurred in outlays for industrial facilities In manufacturing the outlays in the second quarter of were percent higher than a year earlier and in transportation facilities percent higher. In the trade service communications and miscellaneous group the increase was percent. These changes reflect in part the effect of selective controls and aids designed to give priority to the expansions closely related to urgent defense needs which lie largely in the industrial transport and utility fields. Investment in electric utility expansion showed only a moderate increase but this may be accounted for by the longer time required for building the heavy equipment needed for expansion in that field as well as by severe shortages of copper and aluminum and the limited capacity of equipment producers. Furthermore investment in electric utilities has been at a high level since World War II The emphasis on capacity expansion resulting from demands of the defense program is also shown in the fact that an increased proportion of plant and equipment outlays is going for plant construction. On the basis of sample surveys of expansion plans and also the expansion goals for some specific defense-related industries discussed in Part II it is evident that the increase of industrial capacity is proceeding considerably faster than it did during the prosperous period between World War II and mid-1950 The remainder of is likely to show a continuation of the trend to more selective industrial expansion and some decline in investment outlays in the trade and service field as the impact of materials shortages and controls increases. A survey of investment expectations made by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Department of Commerce during the second quarter of suggests a third-quarter level of total nonfarm plant and equipment outlays about equal to that of the second quarter and percent higher than in the third quarter of Nonfarm inventories Unusually rapid accumulation of inventories has prevailed since last fall During the third quarter of the initial post-Korean buying rush de- pleted nonfarm inventories at an annual rate of billion dollars. But as production spurted ahead inventories were built up rapidly. Stimulated by the large rise in demand and prices and haunted by the fears of shortages business generally placed large orders to ensure an uninterrupted flow of supply. In the fourth quarter inventories were being accumulated at the very high annual rate of billion dollars During the first half of and especially during the second quarter much of the accumulation was involuntary in character as sales failed to meet expectations. The rate of accumulation dropped to billion dollars during the first quarter of but rose again to billion during the second quarter of An " excess " of inventories developed in consumer goods at the retail level particularly in consumer durable goods where the fears of shortage had been greatest. But this situation did not bring about a decline in total output as it had done in The rapid growth of the national security program forestalled this. By June inventories were being readjusted in many areas to bring them in line with the current rate of sales Since the Korean outbreak the book value of inventories in manufacturing and trade seasonally adjusted has risen at a record rate. By May the book value amounted to billion dollars compared with billion in June a rise of nearly percent. Well over one-half of this rise reflected replacement of inventories at higher prices and less than half reflected physical accumulation Retail inventories grew at about the same rate as those in manufacturing rising percent from June to May while manufacturing inventories rose percent. However there were significant differences in trends. Durable goods inventories of retailers rose about percent while those of manufacturers advanced about percent. On the other hand retail inventories of nondurable goods advanced about percent while manufacturers ' inventories rose about percent Retailers bought heavily in consumer durable items in anticipation of the much sharper impact of the defense program upon that area. Since production of consumer durable goods was maintained much longer than anticipated and there was some falling off in sales in the second quarter inventory accumulation of these items took place While there was a substantial increase in manufacturers ' inventories from May to May most of it was in purchased materials and goods in process. Finished goods inventories rose percent mainly in the first half of The rise in purchased materials and goods in process was percent but the bulk of this accumulation took place in the second half of The rise in the first half of has been much slower in part because of the stabilization of prices in part also because of the restrictions on inventory accumulation of essential materials instituted by the National Production Authority. Inventories of goods in process have continued to grow steadily The ratio of inventories to sales a year ago was somewhat lower than in most previous periods. It declined further during the summer as sales expanded. But by the end of the year it was higher than in June. By April of this year it had advanced to about the level which was the highest ratio of the postwar period but well below most prewar levels In May the ratio dropped slightly because of an improvement in the manufacturers ' inventory sales ratio. The retail inventory-sales ratio showed the greatest rise and is currently well above any previous postwar figure ( See appendix tables B-21 B-22 and B-23. ) Construction Total new construction activity in the first half of including both private and public has been at a record level of about billion dollars on a seasonally adjusted annual rate basis. This exceeds the rate in the first half of by nearly percent and that of the second half of by about percent. ( See appendix table B-19. ) A major part of these increases reflects higher construction costs. The cost increases especially prominent in lumber and in plumbing and heating items average about percent from the first half of to the first half of The rising trend of construction outlays was halted in the spring of this year and by June the seasonally adjusted rate of total construction had fallen back below the January level. In recent months private construction accounting for about percent of the total has been dropping substantially while public construction has declined only slightly Over the past year construction has come increasingly under the direct or indirect influence of Government controls. A Presidential directive of July ordering the tightening of FHA and veterans ' housing credit terms was followed by Regulation X ; prohibitions on certain types of recreational construction ; the imposition of priorities on materials for essential defense use ; limitation orders on the use of specific scarce materials including copper and aluminum ; a permit system on commercial construction ; the licensing of all projects using more than tons of steel ; and the application beginning in July of the Controlled Materials Plan to the use of steel copper and aluminum Controls have helped to curtail new private residential building and certain types of recreational and commercial construction especially during the past few months. It is to be expected that increasing priority demands for materials particularly steel and more comprehensive and effective controls over their use will bring further curtailment of these and other types of construction not urgently needed for defense The most striking change in the first half of has been the increasingly sharp fall in new private housing expenditures on a seasonally adjusted basis from a February high. In the first months of this year an estimated total new nonfarm dwelling units were started including both private and public about percent less than in the corresponding period of This number was swollen by an abnormally large number of publicly financed starts in June when local housing authorities rushed to get as many units as possible under way before the end of the fiscal year lest the Congress drastically curtail the public housing program for fiscal year The recent downward movement indicates that the backlog of housing construction commitments made before the credit control restriction program went into effect has been largely worked off and that the credit regulations are increasingly showing their effect. Increasing difficulties in getting scarce building supply items and the requirement that building of units with more than square feet be authorized by NPA will further retard the rate of new construction in this field. Even so it is probable that total housing starts for will run somewhat above the original objective of to Private industrial construction under the impact of the defense build-up and the very high level of business activity shot up by more than percent on a seasonally adjusted basis during the first months of The average rate of outlays in that category during that period was more than double the average rate during the first half of and about percent above the rate during the second half of In view of the very large industry plans for facilities expansion for the remainder of and some large private and public programs extending into subsequent years it appears certain that private industrial construction will remain at a high level and probably rise somewhat further New public construction in the first months of was running about percent higher than in the corresponding period of In addition to the rapid step-up in military and naval construction there have been increases in most of the other categories especially residential and nonresidential building. Highway construction outlays are moderately higher than a year ago Corporate finance During the first half of corporations used a record volume of funds to finance expansion of their fixed and working capital. Total uses of funds amounted to billion dollars percent above the first half of About percent of the total was for inventory financing. The rise in the book value of corporate inventories during the first months of the year amounted to about billion dollars compared with a billion dollar increase in the corresponding period of The financing of plant and equipment took about billion dollars more than during the first half of ( See chart and appendix table B-39. ) More than half of the additions to capital was financed with funds from internal sources. Corporate retained earnings amounted to about billion dollars during the first half of the year billion larger than during the CHART SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS In the f i r s t half of corporate expansion of fixed and working capital totaled a record billion dollars with about half financed out of retained earnings and other internal sources BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SOURCES RETAINED EARNINGS DEPRECIATION RESERVES OTHER SOURCES USES PLANT AND EQUIPMENT % && % & ^ OUTLAYS CHANGE IN INVENTORIES OTHER USES PROFIT ESTIMATES FOR 2ND QUARTER BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS NOTE : EXCLUDES FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) corresponding period of last year despite the increase in corporate tax rates and moderately larger dividend disbursements. A rise in depreciation allowances partially reflected accelerated amortization of some types of facilities begun in Although corporations did not resort to external financing to the same extent as during the second half of nonetheless they continued to expand their bank borrowings and trade and mortgage debt substantially Whereas there is usually some contraction of corporate indebtedness to banks during the first months of the year this year corporations expanded their borrowings by billion dollars. The expansion of bank loans to cor- porations during the whole of was billion dollars. The total increase in trade and mortgage debt was more than three times as large as that during the first half of On the other hand the volume of funds obtained from the securities markets was only moderately larger than during the first half of INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS During the late months of and the first half of the first worldwide economic impact of the Korean outbreak began to weaken. The rapid increases in the quantity of United States imports of industrial products and in the market prices of raw material imports tapered off and in some cases there were declines. At the same time the effects of free world rearmament asserted themselves in other nations. Foreign demand for United States exports increased rapidly ; the foreign trade positions of most other countries that are rearming stopped improving and in some cases began to deteriorate ; and the extent of price rises in most other counCHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES During the past year rapidly rising exports have increased the United States export surplus BILLIONS OF 'DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES ^ : IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES- * ' * ANNUAL RATES y INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENTS 2/ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) tries surpassed the rise in the United States. ( See appendix tables B-40 through B-47 for detailed statistics on international transactions. ) These shifting influences were reflected in the international transactions of the United States through a rise of about billion dollars in the annual rate of exports of goods and services from the second half of to the first half of and a moderation of the rise in imports of goods and services. The increase of these imports by an annual rate of billion dollars resulted from a large rise in the first quarter of followed by a leveling off in the second quarter. As a result of these changes the export surplus rose from an annual rate of billion dollars in the second half of to an estimated billion in the first half of The niost significant part of this expansion occurred from the first to the second quarter of when the surplus rose from an annual rate of billion dollars to one estimated at billion the highest level since the widespread tightening of import restrictions and the currency devaluations in These changes are shown in table and chart TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services * First half Annual rates : First half _ Second half _ Imports of goods and services Period Surplus of exports Includes income on foreign investments Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce except as noted These shifts in our international goods and services transactions were almost wholly the result of changed transactions in goods. The rise in the dollar value of merchandise imports which had begun with our economic recovery well before the outbreak of hostilities in Korea but had been sharply accentuated after it continued during the first quarter of the year when both the physical quantity and the dollar value of imports surpassed previous peaks. In the second quarter however this rise came to a halt The halt was the foreign trade counterpart of the leveling off of consumer buying which characterized the United States private economy quite generally during the first half of this year Most of the rise in the dollar value of merchandise imports reflected price increases. During the early months of this year prices of many of bur major imports were stabilized by controls or market forces and some have declined. Prices of rubber tin and wool fell by and percent respectively from their post-Korean peaks although at midyear they were still far above their pre-Korean levels. Despite these declines however average prices of imported goods actually received in this country were still rising in April the latest date for which import price figures are available. ( See chart ) It was a reduction in the quantity of imports that caused their dollar value to stop rising CHART PRICES OF IMPORTS Average prices of imports continued rising,despite declines in current market prices for some major imports INDEX SefTEMBgft INDEX SEPTEMBER = ISO I60 ~ ^ CRUDE FOODSTUFFS ^ s > f % I40 I40 / CRUDE * X ^ < ~ S MATERIALS ^ * : % I20 ( lOO S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J -'ACSO INCLUDES MANUFACTURED FOODSTUFFS AND FINISHED MANUFACTURES NOT SHOWN ON THIS CHART SOURCE * DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE In contrast to the behavior of imports the dollar value of our merchandise exports rose rapidly in February March and April. This rise was more the result of growing physical quantities than of the rise in export prices. Part of the increase in the quantity of exports was attributable to increased shipments of military equipment to Western Europe under the Mutual Defense Assistance Program but most of it was the result of generally increased demand for United States goods of all kinds on the part of those foreign countries which had higher incomes and more ample supplies of dollar exchange. Partly because of these more ample dollar supplies and partly because of fear of shortages and price rises foreign import restrictions have been considerably relaxed since mid-1950 particularly in the Western Hemisphere and Asia and in some cases imports from the United States have been directly encouraged. Thus to a considerable extent the rise in foreign demand had the same basic anticipatory character as the post-Korean rise in domestic demand The increase in import prices since the first half of has far exceeded the rise in export prices as table shows. Although in actual dollar values our merchandise imports in the first half of were at a rate percent higher than in the first half of they were only percent higher in terms of average quantity. In the case of exports the rise in quantity was percent TABLE Index of average prices in United States foreign trade * [ First half of = ] Import prices Period Export prices Ratio of import to export prices Third quarter F ourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Figures represent average unit values of recorded merchandise trade Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce except as noted With the stepping up of programs to strengthen national defense controls over exports in short supply were again imposed. These controls have been intensified in recent months. To limit the drain on domestic resources and to distribute the limited quantities available among the importing countries in accordance with essential needs quantitative export ceilings have been established for copper aluminum zinc iron and steel scrap hides and skins cotton sugar inedible molasses bronze hard bristles diamonds cattle and horse hair lead nickel petroleum oils and greases iron and steel products tinplate wool and a number of other products The strain of our increased domestic demand on free world supplies was considerably alleviated by increased domestic production of several important materials that we import. From the first half of to the first half of we doubled our production of synthetic rubber and raised our production of aluminum and crude petroleum by over percent in each case. We also increased exports of coal to Western Europe and increased our shipments of wheat to India from long tons in the fourth quarter of to and over long tons respectively in the first and the second quarters of this year Increased exports of military end-items were accompanied by an expansion of military aid to foreign countries. Economic aid to the United Kingdom and to Ireland under the European Recovery Program was suspended early in the year ^ but economic aid to other countries was increased slightly. As a result mainly of increased military aid total net Government financing of foreign transactions rose from an annual rate of billion dollars in the second half of to one of billion in the first half of In the second quarter of it was less than the total United States export surplus which as has already been noted expanded rapidly from the first to the second quarter. This was a reversal of the relation between aid and the export surplus which had prevailed since mid-1949 when our export surplus was less than our foreign aid From mid-1949 to the first quarter of there was a large outflow of gold and dollar assets from the United States to other countries. The outflow was particularly heavy during the third quarter of when in addition to a virtual disappearance of our export surplus there was a large but short-lived speculative outflow of United States private capital ( See appendix table B-40. ) Gold and dollar assets were being accumulated by foreign countries largely by the sterling area and Canada but also by a number of countries in Latin America and Southeast Asia at an annual rate of billion dollars in the months after mid-1950. This accumulation abated to a rate of about billion dollars in the first quarter of but at the end of March it was sharply cut and in the second quarter of the year it amounted to an annual rate of only about million dollars While United States demand for imports abated Western European countries began to feel the effect of free world rearmament and the strain upon their resources which it will involve. Increased import prices were accompanied by purchases of larger quantities of imported goods partly to replenish reduced inventories and partly in anticipation of increased requirements of their own expanding defense programs. The resulting rapid rise of imports combined with some reduction of exports enlarged Western Europe 's trade deficit from an annual rate of over billion dollars in the last quarter of to one of more than billion dollars in the first quarter of this year. As table below indicates this was a reversal of an improvement which had been occurring since TABLE Foreign merchandise trade of Western Europe with rest of world1 [ Billions of United States dollars ] Imports Period Annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter _ Exports Excess of imports Trade of metropolitan countries participating in European Recovery Program with all nonparticipating countries Imports are on a c. i. f. basis Source : Economic Cooperation Administration An even more dramatic effect of the past year 's economic developments and a more universal and potentially dangerous one was the setting off of a world-wide price inflation. The magnitude of the price rises which have occurred in various foreign countries was indicated in table page This table shows that most countries of the world have suffered increases in wholesale prices greater than the United States in some cases far greater. The actual increases and the annual rates of increase are shown in appendix table B-27. Countries depending largely upon imports for their raw materials and exporting manufactured goods were generally affected by rises in both import and export prices. In most of them import prices rose more restricting the quantity of goods available for their domestic use. This was the case in most of the countries of Western Europe and in Japan. In the case of the countries exporting primarily raw materials the main causal factor in their inflations has been the increase of export prices. This has brought about an expansion of incomes which has spread through their whole economies. In contrast to the situation in the raw material importing countries export prices have risen more rapidly than import prices and there has consequently been a rise of national income in physical as well as money terms. The inflations in some of these cases may nevertheless be disruptive in their internal economic and social effects GOVERNMENT FISCAL OPERATIONS Net budget receipts of the Treasury which exclude the payments of taxes for Federal Old-Age and Survivors ' Insurance and refunds of receipts were billion dollars in the first half of ( See table ) This was the largest amount ever collected in a 6-month period. Budget expenditures were billion leaving a surplus of billion in the first half year. There had been a small deficit in the preceding months so that the budget surplus for the fiscal year ended June was billion dollars TABLE Federal budget receipts and expenditures the General Fund balance and the public debt [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Item Total Federal budget accounts : Net receipts Expenditures Surplus ( } ) or deficit ( ) i End of period Source : Treasury Department ~ General Fund balance * Public debt outstanding * Calendar year First half Second half first half CHART FEDERAL CASH RECEIPTS FROM AND PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC Total cash receipts were considerably larger than payments during the first half of 1951,resulting in a near-record cash surplus BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * | CASH RECEIPTS -OTHER CASH RECEIPTS INCOME AND PROFITS TAXES CASH PAYMENTS -OTHER CASH PAYMENTS -MILITARY AND INTERNATIONAL Jl w ^ ^ s HO HO CASH SURPLUS ( ) OR DEFICIT ( ) 1st Half 2nd Half I960 I960 1st Half VTES SOURCES.TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET The public debt declined from billion dollars at the end of December to billion at the end of June During this same period there was a substantial increase in the Treasury 's General Fund balance from billion to billion. ( See tables B-31 and B-32 for changes in the kinds of Government securities outstanding and in the distribution of ownership. ) There are large amounts of both receipts and expenditures principally in the Old-Age and Survivors ' Insurance and other trust funds which are not included in the conventional budget accounts. They have an important effect upon the economy because they represent an actual flow of funds being paid into or withdrawn from the Treasury. The consolidated cash totals of receipts and payments are shown in tables and In the first half of the excess of cash receipts was billion dollars or considerably more than the budget surplus. The cash surplus of billion dollars in fiscal compares with a cash deficit of billion dollars in fiscal Chart shows Federal cash receipts and payments in terms of seasonally adjusted annual rates Progress of spending for national security program The largest changes on the expenditure side of the budget were associated with the national security program. As shown in table cash payments for the military services rose from billion dollars in the second half of to billion dollars in the first months of this year. There was also an increase in outlays for international security and foreign relations mostly due to the rise in expenditures for Mutual Defense Assistance. The national security program includes in addition larger expenditures for atomic energy Defense Production Act activities and other functions but these are not shown separately in the table TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by function [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Function Total First half Second half Military services ._ International security and foreign relations Veterans ' services and benefits Social security welfare and health Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest Other Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports _ __ _ _ Total Federal cash payments to the public Calendar year first half * i Estimates based on incomplete data Less than million dollars Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget ( ) Funds obligated by the military services were considerably larger than the actual amount of expenditures. A total of billion dollars was obligated during the fiscal year for the military functions of the Department of Defense and for Mutual Defense Assistance. Expenditures for these same categories amounted to about billion dollars Cash payments by the Federal Government Total cash payments to the public were billion dollars in the first half of this year. This was the highest rate of expenditures since the latter part of when demobilization and reconversion expenses were heavy There have been major declines during the past twelve months in cash expenditures for veterans ' benefits aids to agriculture and unemployment insurance. The principal increases apart from the national security programs have been in certain housing and home finance activities and social security benefits. In the latter case the increases reflected the liberalization of benefits in accordance with the Social Security Act amendments approved in August Cash receipts of the Federal Government Gash receipts of billion dollars in the fiscal year compare with the previous high of about billion dollars in the fiscal year This record volume of Federal receipts reflected the increase in incomes and profits and the increase in tax rates TABLE Federal cash receipts from the public by source [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Source Total Direct taxes on individuals Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes _ _ Excises and customs Surplus property receipts Deposits by States unemployment insurance Veterans ' life insurance premiums- _ _ _ _ _ _ Other Less * Refunds of receipts Total Federal cash receipts other than borrowing First half Calendar year Second half first half i Estimates based on incomplete data Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget As shown by the estimates in tables and Federal cash receipts were substantially higher in the first half of than in the last months of even after adjustment for seasonal factors State and local government finances Both the receipts and payments of the State and local governments increased during the first months of The estimated rise in receipts was somewhat larger than the rise in payments with the result that the small deficit incurred by these governments in the previous period was virtually eliminated. These trends are shown in table TABLE Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Calendar year Receipt or payment Total Cash receipts : Federal State and local Total surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Total cash payments Total cash receipts __ Cash payments : Federal State and local Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) : Federal State and local _ Calendar year first half i First half Second half i Estimates based on incomplete data Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix table A-5 The increase in receipts was chiefly the result of the expansion of the tax base brought about by the general rise in business activity. While a number of new taxes have been adopted by States and localities so far in and rates of many existing taxes have been raised relatively few of these changes became effective during the first months of the year. The rise in expenditures which is due to higher materials costs and wage rates as well as to a continued growth in regular governmental programs has caused more and more attention to be given to possible ways of adding to revenues. ( Appendix tables A-5 through A-8 give details of government finance. ) THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET Table the Nation 's Economic Budget shows the receipts and expenditures of major economic sectors for by half years and the first half of this year. All estimates are seasonally adjusted annual rates. As shown in this table the outstanding economic development of the second half of compared with the first half was the growth in private incomes and expenditures particularly business investment while government cash payments declined. The most significant single factor was the rise in private TABLE The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] first half Economic group second half first half Receipts Excess of receipts ExRependi- ( ) or extures pendi- ceipts tures ( ) Excess of receipts Ex ( ) or Rependiextures pendi- ceipts tures ( ) Excess of receipts Ex- ( ) or pendiextures penditures ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable income arising from current production Government transfers and net interest payments Disposable personal income. Consumption expenditures Personal net saving ( ) ~ ~ I86. ~ ~ ( XJ. ~ ~ " 205.T BUSINESS Retained receipts Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) -SI. INTEENATIONAL Cash loans abroad Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) ./ GOVERNMENT Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis Cash receipts from the public ^ Purchases of goods and services Government transfers 69.S Cash payments to the public * Excess of receipts ( } ) or payments ( ) _ ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product Other adjustments Gross national product Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Consolidated cash ^ statement ( including trust accounts ) for Federal State and local governments NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; they are not included in the gross national product Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A business investment which increased by billion dollars over the level of the first half of the year. Consumer expenditures increased by more than billion dollars about equal to the rise in disposable income From the second half of to the first half of the expansion in government expenditures was almost as large as that of business and consumers combined. Consumer expenditures rose by less than income ^ which raised personal saving to the highest level for any half-year since the war. Business investment continued to rise from the last half of but at a more moderate rate than last year. A large part of the increase was in inventories a substantial portion of the increment reflecting an unexpected decline in demand on the part of consumers. Business receipts did not change greatly since higher taxes more than offset gains in corporate profits before tax. Consequently the excess of business expenditures over receipts rose from the already exceptional levels of While the rise in personal saving offset in part the increase in funds needed by business to finance increased investment expenditures there was a net inflationary impetus arising from the private sectors of the economy in the first half of this year. However the rise in the government surplus helped to restrain inflationary tendencies. Gash receipts rose from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars to almost billion from the second half of to the first half of and the cash surplus expanded from billion to billion. While this change resulted in part from higher corporate and personal incomes it also reflected higher taxes and for that reason helped to restrain inflationary forces Appendix A Statistical Tables Relating to the Nation 's Economic Budget CONTENTS Page A-l A-2 A-3 A-4 A-5 The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years Consumer account calendar years Business account calendar years International account calendar years Government account ( Federal State and local ) calendar years A-6. Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years A-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years A-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget provides a comprehensive view of national economic activity by major economic groups : consumers business government and " international. " The receipts and expenditures of these groups and the net addition to or absorption of saving for the first and second halves of calendar year and the first half of are shown in table A-l Column indicates the major flow of receipts or income. Receipts are divided into two categories : income from current production and receipts of transfers and interest. The total of incomes from current production ( shown in roman type and adjusted for the statistical discrepancy between total receipts and expenditures ) equals current output or the gross national product Expenditures for current output and government transfer payments are shown in column The gross national product comprises only the expenditures for current output. Government expenditures lor goods and services ( i. e. expenditures for current output ) plus government transfer payments equal government cash payments Government cash transfers on the expenditures side in column are shown as receipts by consumers and by foreign countries and international institutions in column The sum of these transfer receipts is approximately equal to government transfer payments in the accompanying table Some discrepancy is due to the use of somewhat different bases for measurement of various components of receipts and payments. For example government interest payments are recorded on a cash basis ; interest receipts of consumers are recorded on a net accrual basis and include interest paid by government corporations. The difference resulting from the two methods of estimating is included in the adjustment item ( line ) Column shows the excess of receipts ( ) or expenditures ( ) for the various accounts : personal net saving the government cash surplus or deficit the excess of international receipts or investment and the excess of gross investment over business receipts. The total excess of receipts in some accounts must equal the total excess of expenditures in others since national income and product are conceptually equal. Personal net saving for example which represents an excess of receipts must be matched by an excess of investment by business or by a government deficit or both ( Also the adjustments made in column must be carried over into column in order to complete the balance between the positive and negative items. ) While the summary table on the Nation 's Economic Budget gives a comprehensive view of recent economic changes additional detail on receipts and expenditures is needed for analytical purposes as is shown in the tables that follow. More complete statistics for recent years on national income and product and their components will be published in a National Income Supplement to the " Survey of Current Business " July Data relating to the cash budget of the Federal Government is from the Budget of the United States. The Council 's Economic Review of January appendix A contains a more extended discussion of the Nation 's Economic Budget and the following tables TABLE A-l. The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ! first half Economic group second half Excess of receipts Ex- ( ) or ReRe- pendiceipts tures exceipts penditures ( ) first half * Excess of re- ceipts Expendi- ( ) or extures penditures Receipts ( ) Excess of receipts Ex ( ) or pendiextures penditures ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable income arising from current production. Government transfers and net interest payments act ) <a Disposable personal income. Consumption expenditures ~ ~ I86. ~ ~ Personal net saving ( ) " ~ ~ BUSINESS Retained receipts Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( } INTERNATIONAL Cash loans abroad Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) GOVERNMENT Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services _ _ Government transfers Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product Other adjustments Gross n a t i o n al product __ i Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers a These adjustments bring the estimates on the receipts side into agreement with those on the expenditures side of the accounts. They include the statistical discrepancy less " subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises. " The statistical discrepancy represents the difference between the two independent estimates of gross national product : income received from current output and expenditures for this output " Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises " are included in national income but not in the gross national product " Other adjustments " are net and are the amount necessary for balancing the excess of receipts ( ) with the excess of expenditures ( ) They are required because some items of government cash payments are either not recorded in private receipts at all ( such as purchases of existing assets ) or they are recorded in a different time period from that in which payment is made. Government cash receipts also include some items not deducted from private incomes or deducted in a different period NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; they are not included in the gross national product Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce and on Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public estimated by the Bureau of the Budget and the Treasury Department. See also footnote TABLE A-2. Consumer account calendar years [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts or expenditures first half i First half Second half Equals * Total personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Less : Personal consumption expenditures * ._ Total Personal income arising from current production of goods and services : Wage and salary receipts and other labor income _ ._ Farm proprietors ' income __ _ Business and professional income Dividends Private interest and rental income Business transfer payments _ Total Plus : Net interest paid by government Dividend on National Service Life Insurance Other government transfers to individuals Equals : Personal net saving ( } ) ADDENDUM Personal income arising from current production Less : Personal tax and nontax payments ._ _ Equals : Disposable income arising from current production Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes adjustment for inventory valuation For detail see appendix table B-4 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A Business account calendar years [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts or investment first half i Total Less : Corporate tax liability * Dividend payments Equals : Corporate undistributed profits ._ Second half Corporate profits before tax First half Plus * Capital consumption allowances Corporate inventory valuation adjustment * __ Equals : Retained business receipts from current production Less : Gross private domestic investment Construction Residential ( nonfarm ) _._ Other private construction Producers ' durable equipment. Change in inventories _ __ Equals : Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Includes capital consumption allowances on noncorporate capital including residences The adjustment measures the excess of the value of the change in the volume of nonfarm business inventories valued at average prices during the period over the change in the book value For additional detail see appendix table B-5 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A International account calendar years [ Billions of dollars annual rates ] Receipts or investment Total U. S. Government cash long-term loans ( net ) Plus : Cash payments to International Monetary Fund and International Bank .__ Second half Surplus of exports of goods and services Less : Net unilateral transfers : Government8. ._ _ Private _ _ o Equals : U. S. Government cash loan transfers ( foreign receipts ) Equals : Net foreign investment First half first half * ( ) Excess of receipts ( { ) or investment ( ) g __ Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes only cash withdrawals under loan agreements. Does not include noncash transactions such as lend-lease and surplus property credits * In I960 the International Monetary Fund returned million dollars in cash to the U. S. Treasury in exchange for United States notes Less than million dollars Net unilateral transfers are included with Government or private expenditures for goods and services. For example remittances ( gifts ) made by American citizens to relatives or charitable groups abroad are included with consumer expenditures. Government aid in the form of grants is included in Government purchases of goods and services. Thus net unilateral transfers must be deducted from the export surplus to avoid double counting Unilateral aid included in appendix table A-8 is on a Daily Treasury Statement basis and is gross NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A Government account ( Federal State and local ) calendar years 51l [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts or expenditures Total Receipts : Tax and nontax payments or liabilities : Federal _ State and local Total Adjustment to cash basis : Noncash receipts * Excess of cash receipts over tax liabilities or payments * First half Second half first half Total Total Other government payments : Transfers to individuals Cash interest payments to public _ _ Loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to International Bank and International Monetary Fund ( net ) All other __ _ _ _ _ Cash receipts from the public Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services : Federal State a n d local _ _ __ Cash surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Cash payments to the public ADDENDUM Federal : Cash receipts Cash payments Surplus ( { ) or deficit ( ) State and local : Cash receipts Cash payments _ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) _ __ _ This table reconciles cash receipts and payments to the public with estimates of government receipts and expenditures included in the national income and product accounts. Cash receipts or payments represent the consolidated cash accounts of the Federal Government including the trust funds and Statelocal governments. All intragovernmental transactions are excluded. The receipts of government corporations and the Post Office are offset against expenditures and the net expenditure included as a cash payment SJrants-in-aid to State and local governments are included as a cash payment of the Federal Government and not included as either a receipt or payment of the States or localities Estimates based on incomplete data Personal and indirect business tax payments corporation tax liabilities ( including excess profits tax liabilities ) and contributions for social insurance * Consists of deductions from government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and government contributions to retirement funds National Service Life Insurance and U. S. Government Life Insurance funds Includes excess of corporation tax receipts over liabilities and excess of personal tax receipts over payments. Negative figure indicates excess of tax liabilities over cash receipts. Cash receipts also include some items of miscellaneous receipts not included in tax and nontax payments such as receipts from sales of surplus property Does not agree with net interest paid by government ( appendix table A-2 ) which is on a net accrual basis and includes interest paid by government corporations See appendix table A-4 International account Includes all other cash payments less noncash payments for goods and services. Other cash payments include net payments by government corporations ( except capital formation ) net prepayments ( deliveries in advance of payments being subtracted ) and the excess of checks paid over checks issued. Noncash purchases of goods and services include deductions from government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and the government contribution to such funds NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A-6. Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Cash receipts first halfi Total Total Federal cash receipts from the public Second half Direct taxes o n individuals _ _ _ _ Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes Excises and customs Surplus property receipts Deposits by States unemployment insurance _ ._ _ Veterans ' life insurance premiums Other Less : Refunds of receipts First half * Estimates are based on incomplete data and exclude the effects of proposed tax legislation NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Function Total Second half first halfi Total Federal cash payments to the public i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Military services _ International security and foreign relations Veterans ' services and benefits Social security welfare and health Agriculture and agricultural resources __ Interest Other ._ Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports First half O TABLE A-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Cash payments Total Direct cash payments for goods and services excluding military services : J Payments to individuals for services rendered : Civilian wages and salaries ( excluding Post Office ) : Federal Grants- and loans-in-aid for performance of specified services net * Second half first half * Payments to business for goods and services : Public works : Federal Orants-in-aid and loans for public works Other goods and services8 Payments to foreign countries and international institutions for goods and services Total Total 1i Loans Investments subsidies and other transfers to business and agriculture : Farmers : Price support net ( including supply program ) __ International Wheat Agreement Other loans and direct subsidies to farmers Business : Home mortgage purchases from financial institutions Loans net Direct subsidy payments Subsidy arising from the postal deficit _ Interest _ Loans and transfer payments to individuals : Social insurance and public assistance : Federal employees ' retirement benefit payments Old-age and disability benefit payments Unemployment insurance benefit payments Orants-in-aid for public assistanceReadjustment benefits pensions and other payments to veterans6. Loans to8 home owners net Interest _. ._ Other Total ( ) ( ) Military services cash payments for goods and servicesn ._ ( ) Total ( ) Total Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions : European Recovery Program loans and grants _ Other loans ( net withdrawals ) Other grants Subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund ( net cash withdrawals ) 4o ( ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total Federal cash payments to the public See footnotes on following page Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports First half i Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Differs from the national-income concept of " government purchases of goods and services " by excluding in addition to military services farm price-support expenditures and unilateral aid to foreign countries. Grants to States and localities for public works here included as a Federal expenditure would be included in the national income accounts as a State and local expenditure. There are other less significant differences between the two concepts ' Excludes payroll deductions for Federal employees ' retirement Includes all grants-in-aid and loans to public bodies for purposes other than public works and public assistance. Includes in addition one-third of Federal expenditures for veterans ' tuition books and supplies This figure is obtained as a residual by deducting all other expenditures from total cash payments to the public. Owing to the fact that data are incomplete for fiscal year the residual is subject to a high marein of error Includes cashing of terminal If ave bonds retired pay of military personnel and National Service and Government life insurance refunds and benefits in addition to veterans ' pensions and readjustment benefits. Includes only one-third of payments for veterans ' tuition books and supplies Less than million dollars s Includes a small amount of interest on tax refunds in addition to interest on the public debt. Interest paid to business includes over million dollars of interest paid each year by the Federal Government to State and local governments. Interest in appendix table A-2 is net and is on an accrual rather than a cash basis ; it includes interest paid by State and local governments and by Government corporations During the period shown represents in large part some of the transactions of the Federal Home Loan Banks Includes expenditures for the Mutual Defense Assistance Program Excludes retired pay and redemption of Armed Forces leave bonds which are included above as payments to veterans Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Appendix B Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power CONTENTS income or expenditure : Gross national product or expenditure Gross national product or expenditure in prices Gross national product or expenditure in first half of prices B-4. Personal consumption expenditures B-5. Gross private domestic investment B-6. National income by distributive shares B-7. Personal income B-8. Relation of national income and personal income B-9. Disposition of personal income B-10. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and first half of prices Employment and wages : B Labor force employment and unemployment B Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B Average weekly hours in selected industries B-14. Average hourly earnings in selected industries B-15. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Production and business activity : B-16. Physical production index of goods and selected services B-17. Industrial production index B-18. Percentage changes in production and consumption of selected commodities United States and other free world to B-19. New construction activity B-20. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-21. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade B-22. Manufacturers ' inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales B Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Prices : B-24. Consumers ' price index B-25. Wholesale price index B-26. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio B-27. Percentage increases in wholesale prices in the United States and foreign countries since June National B-l B-2 B-3 Page Money banking and credit : B-28. Consumer credit outstanding B-29. Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks B-30. Deposits and currency B-31. Estimated ownership of Federal securities B-32. United States Government debt volume and kind of securities B-33. Bond yields and interest rates selected years Corporate profits and finance : B-34. Profits before and after tax all private corporations B-35. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations B-36. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group B-37. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group B-38. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class B-39. Sources and uses of corporate funds International transactions : B-40. International transactions of the United States B United States Government grants other unilateral transfers and loans to foreign countries B-42. United States merchandise export surplus by area quarterly average and B-43. United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and B-44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and B United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and B United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and B Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and Summary : B-48. Changes in selected economic series since and Page Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power TABLE B-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross national product Period GovernPersonal Gross consumpprivate Net foreign ment pur chases oftion exdomestic investment goods and penditures investment services _ _. Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half First baif i First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * _ _ __ i Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in 1939prices 1929-50l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Gross private domestic investment Total gross naPro- Change tional New ducin er ? ' prodDur- Non- Servdurcon- dur- busiuct Total able able ices Total strucness able goods goods tion equip- invenment tories Government purchases of goods and services PriNet vate forgross eign naintion'1 ! vestFed- State prodment Total eral and uct local ! i | See " Survey of Current Business " January and the National Income Supplement to the " Survey " July for explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-3. Gross national product or expenditure in fast half of prices 1929-51l [ Billions of dollars first half of prices ] Personal consumption expenditures <o Total gross national product Period t3 " g | a o " to O bJO cu be H fi s I i & ? e '> * a O $ _t PH _ Government purchase ? of goods and services Gross private domestic investment .a 1cc S-c Net foreign in.vest ment Federal K * ll o p OJ4- ~ e t> g o bx> O * o fr * -> 0> fc ii CQ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) -LO J2.2 tf-15.2 ' f ) ~ i Seasonally adjusted annual rates ',fr I First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter ' Estimates based on preliminary data. These estimate ? represent a rough conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices. ( See appendix table B-2. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes for the first half of as a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor component ? this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the war years and for the series on changes in business inventories Not available Less than million dollars NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-4. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total exAutomopenditures Total biles Other Total Food ' Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other ing ing * and parts Period I960- _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter " _ Includes alcoholic beverages Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-5. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment and Net change in busiconstruction plant and equipment ness inventories Total Resi- Other dential prigross priconNonstruc- vate vate farm conCon- tion strucdomesConafter tic Total i Equip- strue Total Equip- struc- ( non- tion Total revalu- Farm ment tion farm ) ! * ment tion i investation ment adjustment Period O ( ) ' & 1st half 2d half 1st half _.. ',.1 Seasonally adjusted annual rates ( ) '.2 1st quarter.... 2d quarter... 3d quarter 4th quarter 1st quarter... 2d quarter * __ ( ) i ! i i Items for and earlier years are not comparable with those for later years nor with figures shown in appendix tables B-19 and B-20 Total producers ' durable equipment less " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " These figures assume that farmers purchase and percent respectively of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages. Includes hotel construction prior to only Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " ( See footnote ) IncI udes construction of hotels tourist cabins motor courts and dormitories since only fl Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential and all other private ' Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised scries of national iocome and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-6. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Business and professional income and inventory valuation Inadjustment Total Comcome pennation- sation of al In- farm Inin- of emcome ven- protory come1 ployof ees Total unin- valu- prietors corpo- ation rated adenter- justprises ment Period Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Rental in come In- Net of Corpo- ven- interperrate tory sons Total prof- valu- est its ation before adtax justment t ( ) ! l ( > _. ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half First half * First quarter _ _ Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ First quarter Second quarter National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals and businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix table B-7 ) and employer and employee contributions for social insurance ( see appendix table B-8 ) * See appendix table B-34 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes L * 'ss than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-7. Personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Total personal income Salaries wages and other labor income Perio-1 Proprie- Dividends and tors ' and personal Transfer rental J interest3 payments income income Nonagricultural personal income * Agricultural income Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ First quarter Second quarter 5_ Differs from " compensation of employees " in appendix table B-6 in that it excludes employer and employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor incomecompensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims See appendix table B-6 for major components See appendix table B-34 for dividend payments * Nonagrictiltural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultura corporations fi Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-8. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Plus : Less : CorpoExcess rate of Nation- profits Contri- wage al and in- butions acincome vento tory social cruals valu- insur- over disation ance burseadjustments ment Period Net Gov- interBusi- Equals : ernPerest ness rrent paid Divi- trans- sonal trans- by dends fer income fer paypay- governments ments ment _ ) ) ( ) ) ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates I960 First half Second half First half * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter. Second quarter _ __ _ _ __ ) ( ) ) ) Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE.--The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-9. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Personal Personal tax and income nontax payments Period Less : Equals : Equals : Disposa- Personal Personal conble sumption net personal expendi- saving income tures Net saving as percent of disposable personal income _ is. Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half First half i_ _ _ First quarterSecond quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter Frst quarter Second quarter * _ _ ~ i Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and fast half of prices Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Per capita disposable income ( dollars ) Period Current prices First half of ! prices Current prices First half of prices l Population ( thousands ) _- _.._ _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half _ __ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter-.3 Second quarter _ First half Dollar estimates in current prices divided by an over-all price index for personal consumption expend ! tures. This price index was based on Department of Commerce data shifted from a base Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period s Estim.tes based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business " July Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-ll. Labor force employment and unemployment Civilian labor force Total labor force ( including armed forces ) * Period Armed forces i Total civilian labor force Employment a Total Agri- Nonagricultural cultural Unemployment Unemployment as percent of total civilian labor force Thousands of persons years of age and over Monthly average : I ! _ M70 ( ) ( ) ( ' ) -_- First half Second half ( ) First half January February March April May _ June July Aueust September October November December January February March April May June _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Data for exclude about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated iti the census. This figure is deducted by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with data Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary lay-off and industrial disputes Not available \ NOTE. Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the month Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE B Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments 51l [ Thousands of employees ] Total wage and salary workers Period Monthly average : Manufacturing Total Non- MinDur- dura- ing able ble goods goods GovTransernCon- portament tract tion Fi- Serv- ( Fedconand Trade * nance ice eral struc- public State tion utiliand ties local ) C ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ' ) ( ' ) C ) ( ' ) 4.99Q ( ) 7F6 ( * ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1950-First half Second half First half < _ _ _ _ January February March April May June July August _ September October November December ' 6K6 1.<W7 January February March April * May < June i Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors selfemployed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce ( appendix table B-11 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary lay-offs and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments * Data for the trade and service divisions beginning with are not comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division * Not available Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages in bituminous coal mining NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-13. Average weekly hours in selected industries Manufacturing Bitumi- Build- Class I ing steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels nous con ( yearsale Nonrailtrade round ) coal Durable durable mining struc- roads phone trade Total goods tion goods Period Monthly average : ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ( ) ) i1 ) ) ) ) ( ) & ) ) ) ) ) ) o <ro ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) _ V1 ) ( ' ) ( ) First half Second half. _ First half * .._ ) February March April May. June July August September- _ October November. December fl ( ) ) ) ( ' ) ( ( ) ' ( ' ) January January February March April * May< June * > Not available * Average for year not available because new series was started in April Beginning with June data relate to nonsupervisory employees only * Not strictly comparable with previous data Estimates based on incomplete data * Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for nonsupcrvisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads whore monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-14. Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : '___ $ Bitumi- Build- Class I nous in ? con- strain TVle- Whole- " Retail Hotels sale ( yearstruccoal railtrade round ) ! Dura- Nonphone trade ble durable mining tion roads goods goods ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) f2 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( 22> ( ) ( ) ( ) $ .8-F6 .90S ( ) ( ) $ l.r>6 1P30 _ ? .5G6 ^ 194Q H _ _ ( ' ) om ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ^ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) $ ( ) ( ) $ $ n ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( > First hn If Second half.. First half ( ) January February March April May June July August _ September October November.. December January February March April May June ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) nents only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included Not available * Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-l Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries > Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : $ Bitumi- Build- Class I nous ing con steam Tele- Wholesale Dura- Noncoal strucrailphone trade ble durable mining tion roads goods goods $ Retail Hotels ( yeartrade round ) * $ $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ _ < ( ) ( ) $ ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ ? ! ( ' ) ) $ 1950-First half Second half. s First half e.. ( ) January ._ February March April Mav June July August September October November December i January February March Aprils May June ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( a ) ( ) ( ) ( a ) ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included Not available * Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not com parable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments fl Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-16. Physical production index of goods and selected services [ = i ] Production of selected services Production of goods Nonagrictiltural production Period Weights : Total Nonagricultural AgriTotal cultural proproduction of goods duction Total Industrial production TeleTrans- phone porand tation telegraph Construction Electric and gas utilities nT no _- __ _ _ First half Second half First half ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) All half-year data have been seasonally adjusted except the electric and gas utilities for which no satisfactory adjustment factor is available Computed from the Department of Commerce national income data. The weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the total for the industries. The agriculture weight excludes net rents paid by landlords living on farms imputed rents and subsidy payments. The weight for construction has been adjusted to include force account and other construction done outside of the contract construction industry the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction. Manufacturers and minerals of the industrial production index were weighted into the total indexes separately but only the total industrial production index is shown here. See appendix table B-17 for the individual components of the index of industrial production Not available * Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed s Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. A composite index of production of goods and services has not been compiled because of the inadequate data for measuring the production of services. The only service production data used were for transportation and for communications by telephone and telegraph. Data for measuring such services as wholesale and retail trade finance insurance real estate Government and communication other than telephone and telegraph were inadequate for separate indexes and for an index for all services other than transportation telephone and telegraph Sources : Based on the following data : Agricultural production : Department of Agriculture index'of farm output which measures the physica volume of farm production for human use Industrial production : Federal Reserve index of industrial production Construction : Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated by their index of construction costs and converted into relatives with as Electric and gas utilities : Based on the following series : Electric power produced by utilities as reported by the Federal Power Commission and sales'of manufactured and mixed gas to consumers as reported by the American Gas Association. The two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period as The relative series are combined into an index with electric power given a weight of and gas the respective percentages of the revenues of each of the utilities to the total revenues produced by both in the base period Transportation : Department of Commerce index of transportation ; Telephone and telegraph : Based on Department of Labor production indexes for and on a series of Works Progress Administration for These indexes are for class A telephone carriers and the principal wire-telegraph and ocean-cable carriers which file annual reports with the Federal Communications Commission TABLE B-17. Industrial production index 192Q-51 [ = adjusted for seasonal variation ] Period Monthly average : Total industrial production Manufactures Minerals Total Durable Nondurable First half... Second half. First half January February March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November.. December. _ January February March April Mayi June * i Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Table B-18. Percentage changes in production and consumption of selected commodities United States and other free world to [ Percent ] Production Commodity United States Commodities in which United States is substantially self-sufficient : Bread grains '3 Coarse grains _ __ _ Cotton Fats and oils _ _ _ Fertilizer ( nitrogenous ) Lumber.. Meat Sulfur native Commodities of which United States has substantial imports : Aluminum... Cobalt Copper Coffee ( green ) _ _ Iron ore Lead Manganese ore _ NewsprintNickel Petroleum Rubber : Natural and synthetic1 Natural only __ _ Sugar ( raw equivalent ) Tin __ Tungsten Wood pulp ( mechanical and chemical ) Wool9 Zinc Consumption * Other free world United States Other free world g '+54 ( < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Apparent consumption i. e. production plus imports minus exports except as noted in footnote Estimated Change from 1935/36 to 1939/40 average to 1950/51 Not available Barley corn and oats Change from 193-V36 to 1938/39 average to 1950/51. Oil-content basis. Includes butter and peanuts Represents estimated actual rather than apparent consumption Change from 1937/38 to 1941/42 average to 1950/51 Production represents metal content of mine production This very high percentage results from the low absolute level of production of synthetic rubber in Source : Compiled by the Department of State TABLE B-19. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Public construction Total Resi- NonNonnew residenconresiTotal tial den- Other Total Mili- den- High- Other struc- pri- build- tial tary pripubtion and tial vate ing build- vate public naval build- ways lic ' ing ( non- ( noning farm ) farm ) Period _ _ _ _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half First half January February March A pril May _ _ June July August September October November _ December ___ _ January Febiuary March _ April May__ June __ _ Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product Includes public utility farm and other private construction not separately sh wn Includes residential sewer and water miscellaneous public service enterprises conservation and development and all other public construction not separately shown Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE B-20. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Transportation Period Total i Total ManuRailfactur- Mining .road ing Other ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( * ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ) ( ' ) ( ' ) ( ) -_ Electric and gas utilities Commercial and miscellaneous * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half First half * First quarter Second Quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter * Excludes agriculture and outlays charged to current account * Commercial and miscellaneous include trade service finance and communication for all years shown Prior to miscellaneous also included transportation other than railroad and electric and gas utilities which are not available separately for these years Not available separately for years prior to < Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to Estimates for second and third quarters of are based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in a survey made during May and early June NOTE. These figures do not agree with those shown in column of appendix table B-5 and included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest million dollars Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-21. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and tradet [ Adjusted for seasonal variation ] M W ^ O3 en Millions of dollars e a Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales * <U O b +> t * Retail trade Inventories * Millions of dollars Ratio of ai inventori monthly sal CQ Wholesale trade Inventories * OT m Millions of dollars Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales ' Inventories * Period Manufacturing Inventories > Millions of dollars Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales * Total manufacturing and trade : First half.... Second half. : First half * : January February.- March April May June July August September. October November December. _ ] : January February March * April * May * Book value end of period * Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month * Average inventories based on centered averages of end-of-period figures * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B Manufacturers ' inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales [ Not adjusted for seasonal variation ] Total manufacturing Period Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales * Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales i Materials and goods in process Finished goods Materials and goods in process Finished goods Materials and goods in process Finished goods Materials and goods in process Finished goods Materials and goods in process Finished goods First half Seconci half. First half * January February March April May June July August _ September.. October November.. December January February March April * May * Average inventories based on centered averages of end-of-period figures Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-23. Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Reported data ( millions of dollars ) * Period Monthly average : Sales ( total for month ) Stocks ( end of month ) Derived data ( millions of dollars ) ! OutNew standing Receipts orders ( total orders for ( total for ( end of month ) month ) month ) ( ) Ratio Stocks to sales ( ) Orders to sales Orders to stocks ( ) ( ) ( ) First half Second half First half 195Q January February March _ April May June July Ausust September October November December January February March April May % Not adjusted for seasonal variation Not available Average of data for first months NOTE. These figures are not estimates for all department stores in the United States. Figures for sales stocks and outstanding orders are based on actual reports from the stores. Receipts of goods are derived from the reported figures on sales and stocks. New orders are derived from estimates of receipts and reported figures on outstanding orders Semiannual and annual data on receipts and new orders can not be derived directly from the monthly averages of sales stocks and outstanding orders Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-24. Consumers * price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ = ] Period _ All items Food Apparel Rent Fuel elec- HouseMisceltricity furand re- nish- laneous frigerings ation First half Second half _ _ _ First half _ January February March April May June July August _ September October November December January _ ._ February March April May June a ( ) ( ) i Estimates based on data available through May except for food available Estimate based on a survey of cities Source : Department of Labor Not ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) TABLE # Wholesale price index [ = ] Monthly average : e B H e ft " S3 PM Miscellaneous & & 2-S | * o< Housefurnishing goods e s C'O If * % Chemicals and allied products Period Jh Building materials All commodities ther tlian farmprocLucts ajad foocIs Of ) A First half Second half First January February.. March April. May June * _ fl lf>9 i Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Labor half January February March April May June July August _ September October November December TABLE B-26. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ = ] Prices received Period Monthly average : __ Parity ratio * Prices paid ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) First half Second half First half January February _ _ March April May June July Aujrust September October November 15_ December January February _ _ March April May _ June _- i Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) a Includes subsidy payments between October and June Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-27. Percentage increases in wholesale prices in the United States and foreign countries since June Percentage increase from June to latest date Country Actual United States Africa and Near East : Algeria Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Lebanon Morocco Tunisia Union of South Africa Latest date Annual rate June February April May April February May April March May __ _ _ Western European countries : Austria _ Belgium Denmark France Germany ( Federal Republic ) * Greece _ Ireland Italy. _ Netherlands Norway Portugal _ Spain Sweden _ Switzerland__ Turkey United Kingdom May May May May April May April April April June April April April May March May Latin America : Argentina * Brazil Chile Costa Rica __ Cuba <___ Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Mexico Nicaragua Peru _ Venezuela ___ November April February May February May December May May December May May Pacific and Far East : Australia India..__ _ Indochina Japan New Zealand Philippines Thailand _ _____ _._ _ Other : Canada Finland March May April April December May March May May Covers basic materials only Covers producers ' prices of industrial products * Cost-of-living figures Retail food figures NOTE. -For many countries figures are for capital or principal city only Sources : International Monetary Fund and United States Economic Cooperation Administration TABLE B-28. Consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit Total consumer credit End of period Total Automobile sale credit Other Charge accounts Other consumer credit January February March April May June July August September October November December January February March April * May June ._ _ __ ._ i Includes other sale credit and loans including repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Administration * Includes loans by pawnbrokers service credit and single-payment loans under $ made by commercial banks. The single-payment loan item was revised in November to exclude loans over $ See Federal Reserve Bulletin for November pp. * Estimates based on incomplete data ; June by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-29. Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks * [ Billions of dollars ] Weekly reporting member banks All commercial banks End of period s June4 June * June * June * June * June * Total loans and investments _ Investments Loans Total U. Gov- Other ernment securiobligaties tions Total loans ( net ) Commercial industrial and agricultural loans ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 194g _ 1935_june * January __ February March _. _ April May __ June July August September _ October November _ December. _ ' January February ._ March April May June * _ -.,_ _ _ i Excludes mutual savings banks * For all commercial banks last reporting date within period ; for weekly reporting member banks reporting date nearest end of period Includes open-market paper June data are used because complete end-of-year data prior to are not available for United States Government obligations * Not available prior to May when the loan classification was revised Series revised to extend coverage. Previous figures not strictly comparable f Estimates for all commercial banks based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-30. Deposits and currency [ Millions of dollars ] End of period > Total de- U. S. Govposits and ernment currency deposits/ Deposits adjusted and currency ( privately held money supply ) * Total Currency outside banks Adjusted demand deposits * Time deposits ' ; _ January February March April May June July August September October November December January February March April May June V ~ Last reporting date during the period * Includes United States Government deposits at Federal Reserve Banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with includes United States Treasurer 's time deposits open account Includes deposits and currency held by State and local governments Includes demand deposits other than interbank and United States Government less cash items in process of collection ' Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-31. Estimated ownership of Federal securities [ Billions of dollars par values1 ] Gross debt and guaranteed obligations outstanding End of period Held by public Held by U.S GovernState Total * ment Total Com- Federal agencies held by and local mercial Reserve and trust public govern- banks4 banks ments funds Nonbank private corpoIndirations viduals6 and associations January. _ _ February March April May June _ _ _ _ ._ July August September October November __ December.- January February March April May ? June _ United States savings bonds series A-D E and F are included at current redemption values Securities issued or guaranteed by the United States Government excluding guaranteed securities held by the Treasury Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and Territories and possessions < Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions ; excludes securities held in trust departments Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and foreign accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund hi special non-interest-bearing notes issued by6 the United States Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts f Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE B-32. United States Government debt volume and kind of securities [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Gross Marketable public Nonmarketable public issues public issues Nonin- Fully debt and terest guarguaranbearing anteed teed Treas- Special debt securities issues i Short- Treasury United ury issues States tax and term bonds savings savings issues ' bonds notes End of period ( * ) ( < ) January __ February March April May June _ July _ August September October November December ' ( < ) ( < ) < ) January _ February March April May June _ _ ? ) * ) ) ( ) ( * ) i Total includes Postal Savings bonds depositary bonds. Armed Forces leave bonds and Treasury investment bonds not shown separately * Includes Treasury bills certificates of indebtedness and Treasury notes Issued to United States investment accounts ; these accounts also held billion dollars of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on June * Less than million dollars Source : Treasury Department TABLE B-33. Bond yields and interest rates selected years [ Percent per annum ] United States Government security yields New York Period 3-month Treas- month ury issues bills i Average : ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) Average Prime Bankers Federal of rates charged commer- accept- Reserve cial Corporate by banks Bank ances Aaa discount on short- paper Taxable bonds term days- rate bonds ( Moody 's ) loans- months- New New New years York selected York and over York cities ( ) ( ) ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) U.OO n.oo First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter I960 '1.00 i Rate on new issues within period Includes certificates of indebtedness when outstanding in proper maturity range and selected note and bond issues Treasury bills were first issued in December < Not available before August Taxable bonds in this classification were first issued in March Not available on same basis From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable hi one year or less Sources : Treasury Department Moody 's Investors Service and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-34. Profits before and after tax all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after tax Corporate profits before tax Corporate tax liability Period Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits W Seasonally adjusted annual rates I960 First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter * First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter -_ i Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Minus million dollars ' Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix table B-6 for profits before tax and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Sales and prof ts of large manufacturing corporations [ Millions of dollars ] Durable goods industries ( corporations ) Period Nondurable goods industries ( corporations ) * Profits Profits Sales Sales Before taxes After taxes Before taxes After taxes _ Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter First quarter See Federal Reserve Bulletin June and subsequent issues for similar data for the following industry groups : primary metals and products machinery automobiles and equipment foods and kindred products chemicals and allied products and petroleum refining Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published reports of various industrial corporations TABLE B-36. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group Percentage ratio ^ of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Industry group total Total first First Second Third Fourth quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Before Federal taxes Food... Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products _ Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industriesPrimary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) ,__ Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts All private manufacturing corporations Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) ._ After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations- Food Tobacco manufactures. Textile m ill products Apparel and finished textiles _ Lumber and wood products.. Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products.. Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber productsLeather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-37. Relation of profits before and after taxe $ to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Profits in cents per dollar of sales Industry group total first First Second Third Fourth quarter Total quarter quarter quarter quarter Before Federal taxes Furniture and fixtures _ Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber'products _ Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufacturers _ _ Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks _ Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products. Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products _ Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries All private manufacturing corporations- Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery _ _ Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts _ _ Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) ^ 4.S Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission 26l TABLE B-38. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class total Assets elass ( thousands of dollars ) First quarter Total Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter first quarter Ratio of profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to to to to and over ._ Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to to t o and over _ Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to to to to and over Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to to to ana over _ fl.9 Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-39. Sources and uses of corporate funds 1947-51l [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Uses : Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) _ Change in customer receivables Cash and U. Government securities Other current assets Total uses Sources : Internal : Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation allowances Total internal sources External : Change in trade debt Change in Federal income tax liability. -Other current liabilities Change in bank loans Change hi mortgages Net new issues first Second half half * ( ) First half ( ) Total external sources Total sources Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) i Excludes banks and insurance companies Not adjusted for seasonal variation Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE B-40. International transactions of the United States [ Millions of dollars ] Type of transaction Exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods l total total Second Third Fourth First Second First Total quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter1 quarter Total goods Services _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Income on in vestments _-- Total exports Imports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods * Total goods Services _ _ _ Income on in vestments. __ Total imports Surplus of exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods * _ _ Total goods Services Income on investments. _ _ Total surplus of exports _ Means of financing surplus of exports of goods and services : * Liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries _ __ _ Dollar disbursements by : International Monetary Fund International Bank.__ United States Government sources : * Unilateral transfers.. _ Long- and short-term loans United States private sources : " Remittancfis Long- and short-term capital Total means of financing Errors and omissions Estimates ba ed on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers J Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United States customs area and other adjustments All figures for means of financing are on a net basis For detail see appendix table B-41 & Excludes purchases or sales of obligations issued by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-41. United States Government grants other unilateral transfers and loans to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid First Second Third Fourth First Second Total quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter ter ter ^ ter i Unilateral payments : Military aid programs : Mutual defense assistance program Greek-Turkish aid. Chinese aid EGA programs : European Recovery Program. Other Army Civilian Supply Program * Point Four assistance Philippine Rehabilitation Act... Interim aid and post-UNRRA ._ International Refugee Organization and other United Nations relief organizations Other Total unilateral payments Less : Unilateral receipts ( ) ( ) g ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) '205 ( ) ( ) Total long-term loans and investments _. Less : Repayments ( ) ( ) Equals : Net unilateral payments Long-term loans and investments : United Kingdom loan _ EGA programs Export-Import Bank loans _ Surplus property credits including ship sales Raw-materiaFcredits to occupied areas United Nations building loan Other Equals : Net long-term loans and in vestments Outflow of short-term capital ( net ) Total net unilateral payments loans and investments ( ) ( ) ( ) i Estimates based on incomplete data : second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available * Less than thousand dollars < Includes disbursements by EGA from funds appropriated under the Army Civilian Supply Program Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-42. United States merchandise export surplus by area quarterly average and Period Total Other merchandise Canada Western Hemiexport sphere surplus ERP countries * Other Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Millions of dollars Quarterly average : 1950S First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter rj First quarter Second quarter * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( fi ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : I960 ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to and imports from Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to trade with the three western zones Data by area exclude while total exports include " special category " exports. For this reason the export or import surplus by area will not add to the total export surplus in these periods. For the amount of " special category " exports see table B-43 footnote * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. See also footnote Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-43. United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and Total l exDorts including Canada reexports Period Other Australia ERP Western Other and Hemi- countries2 Europe Asia Oceania Africa sphere Millions of dollars Quarterly average : _ 1950S First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * ( ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) ( s ) ( ) First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ ( fi ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to exports to the three western zones Data by area exclude while total exports include " special category " exports. For this reason exports by area will not add to total exports hi these periods. " Special category " exports amounted to million dollars in the third quarter of million in the fourth quarter and million in the first quarter of Estimates based upon incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Data hi this table cover all merchandise including reexports shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. See also footnote Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and [ = ] Total domestic exports Period Crude materials ManufacCrude tured foodstuffs i foodstuffs i Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) Unit value indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i Export indexes of crude and manufactured foodstuffs particularly those of unit value in are influenced by sales of large quantities of food products at prices considerably below market quotations Such exports include sales from Government-owned surplus and shipments on which subsidies were paid by the Department of Agriculture * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers. For unit value April used as indicative of entire quarter Not available NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including change in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. The indexes for to are based on data which include goods destined to the United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians hi occupied areas Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-45. United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and Total general imports Period Canada i Other Western Hemisphere ERP countries Other Europe Asia a Australia and Oceania Africa Millions of dollars Quarterly average : _ I960 First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter. Second quarter < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( ) ( < ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : I960 First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter ._ _ _ * Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to imports from the three western zones Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising channels plus entries into bonded customs warehouses Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABI * E B-46. United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and Total imports for consumption Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufac- Semimanu- Finished tured manufacfactures foodstuffs tures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter .._ Fourth quarter _ -First quarter Second quarter * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _._ Fourth quarter ll.fi First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter _ * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Imports for consumption include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels plus withdrawals from bonded customs warehouses for consumption Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-47. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption bv economic class quarterly average and [ = Total imports for Crude consump- materials tion Period Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : _ 1949_.._ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Unit value indexes Quarterly average : _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers. For unit value April used as in dicative of entire quarter a Not available NoTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions arc reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Changes in selected economic series since and = Source : Appendix Table No Economic series Total B-l.... Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services B-3.._. Gross national product in first half of prices _ Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services.. _ First half Second half Percentage increase * first half * first sechalf to ond half first to half first half B-7- Personal income Disposal personable income _ Personal net saving B-10... Per capita disposable personal income : Current prices First half of prices B-6 National income Compensation of employees B-11-- Labor force including armed forces Civilian labor force Employment _ _ Agricultural Nonagri cultural. Unemployment B-15... Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Building construction ._ B-16... Physical production index of goods Agricultural Nonagricultural. _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 8'5.5 ( ) -.a ( ) N ( ) B-17... Industrial production Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures Minerals B-19... New construction Private Residential ( nonfarm ) Nonresidential Other private Public B-20... Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Manufacturing B-21__. Inventories end of period Manufacturing. Wholesale trade Retail trade Sales Manufacturing Wholesale traote Retail trade B-24.,. Consumers * price index : All items Food Apparel Rent Housefurnishings See foettnotes at end of table TABLE B-48. Changes in selected economic series since and Continued = Source : Appendix Table No Economic series B-25... Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products Foods Other than farm products and foods B-26... Prices received by farmers Prices paid by farmers ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) Percentage increase * Total First half Second half first half first second half half to first to first half half B-28... Consumer credit outstanding end of period _ Instalment credit B-29... Loans and investments of all commercial banks end of period Loans Investments in U. S. Government obligations B-34... Corporate profits : Profits before tax. Profits after tax Dividend payments Undistributed profits B-43... Merchandise exports including reexports _ * * <364 B-45... General merchandise imports * * i Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from the indexes shown here > Estimates based on incomplete data Not available average = Appendix C Lists of Text Tables and Charts in the Midyear Economic Report of the President and the Economic Situation at Midyear CONTENTS G-l. List of text tables C-2. List of charts C-l List of Text Tables Table No page Changes in the major components of the gross national product to National security program : deliveries of military goods and other expenditures United States consumption and production of selected commodities as percentages of free world production Changes in the distribution of family income before taxes to Distribution of income in the postwar period Distribution of families by income level before and after Federal income tax Summary of tax amortization necessity certificates and direct loans and loan guarantees under Defense Production Act by type of production through June Importance of small business in selected defense-related industries Regional impact of the defense program compared to regional economic activities in Actual and proposed increases in individual income and excise taxes by income groups estimated for fiscal year Range of wholesale price increases in foreign countries since June Output of selected industries May compared with peak Changes in wholesale prices Changes in consumers ' prices Liquid saving by individuals United States exports and imports of goods and services Index of average prices in United States foreign trade Foreign merchandise trade of Western Europe with rest of world Federal budget receipts and expenditures the General Fund balance and the public debt Federal cash payments to the public by function Federal cash receipts from the public by source Government cash receipts from and payments to the public The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years C List of Charts Chart No Gross national product and national security programs Military expenditures as percent of gross national product Per capita gross national product and military expenditures Economic indicators Production spending and prices since mid-1950 The expanding security program Growth in production Expansion of the labor force Increases in labor input and output Changes in labor input and output Changes in production Changes in the labor force Gross national product Changes in composition of gross national product since 1st half of prices Federal budget expenditures Military requirements for basic metals percent of expected supply Gross private domestic investment 1st half of prices Expansion in industrial capacity to end of Changes in personal consumption expenditures 1st half of prices Per capita consumption expenditures 1st half of prices Production of selected consumer durable goods Consumer income and demand and price increases Private investment and its financing Federal budget receipts expenditures and the public debt Civilian labor force Changes in nonagricultural employment Industrial production Wholesale prices Wholesale prices of industrial products Consumers ' prices Wages and hours all manufacturing industries Corporate profits Bank loans and investments Consumer credit Personal income Business investment Sources and uses of corporate funds Exports and imports of goods and services Prices of imports Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public Page