Mid r Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS July THE MIDYEAR ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress July Together with a report THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR by the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL T H E WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C July The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith a Midyear Economic Report to the Congress. This is supplementary to the Economic Report of the President of January and is transmitted in accordance with section ( b ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this report I am transmitting a report The Economic Situation at Midyear prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully III Contents T H E MIDYEAR ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT A time for action The economic situation in summary Recommended program T H E ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR by the Council of Economic Advisers ) ( a report to the President To the Congress of the United States : N January I transmitted to the Congress my annual Economic Report under the Employment Act of At the present stage in economic affairs it is again desirable that the Congress and the country be presented with an up-to-date survey of the economic situation the difficulties it presents and the solutions called for. This Midyear Economic Report is transmitted to the Congress for that purpose O A Time for Action I N the years since the end of hostilities in World War II the American economy has offered an impressive display of inherent strength and elasticity. More than veterans have been smoothly absorbed into the activities of the business world. Month after month the labor force has been employed at a level which but few were willing to forecast. In spite of high living costs our people continue to enjoy high standards of living. The income of American consumers and the resources of American business furnish the basis for sustained markets. Our financial condition is strong. A national debt of tremendous size has been managed so skillfully that we are prone to treat too lightly the problems which it still offers But our present prosperity should not blind us to the growing threats to our well-being. Repeatedly I have called attention to the developing inflationary conditions which endanger both our domestic strength and our place in world affairs. In addition recent events have forced us into a preparedness program adding to the strains upon our home economy and making it even more imperative that we act with courage and dispatch In my recent message to * he Congress upon the opening of the special session I again advised the Congress of the dangers that we face and made recommendations to meet them I must emphasize that the course of inflation does not run according to any set schedule. Until the very eve of an economic collapse many people are apt to grow more and more confident about the soundness of the economy and the indefinite continuance of the boom. It may not be true that " a boom is always followed by a bust " as many students of business affairs frequently say. But it would be reckless to assume that the bust will not happen if we neglect action to control the boom For years it has been asserted that if matters were left alone there would be so great an increase in production that it would take care of prices Increasing the supply of goods is indeed to be sought through every practicable means. But historically no important inflation has been cured in that manner. Nor has this one despite the fact that every factor of high profits heavy market demand and large funds available for investment has been favorable to the expansion of production The policy proclaimed in the Employment Act requires us to devise and adopt positive measures to stop this inflation and secure relative stabilization. It is not too late for preventive measures and we are not yet'forced by the tragic consequences of depression to adopt measures which would interfere with our free economy far more than would any or all of the measures I have proposed. I realize that the anti-inflationary program I have offered will impede some business plans will curb some profit opportunities and may limit some wage advances. It is of the very essence of a plan to counteract inflation that this be done. All groups will ultimately benefit when it is done The Economic Situation in Summary T HE recommendations that I have made for dealing with inflation are based upon a candid look at the whole economic situation as it has developed over the past months and upon a careful analysis of where this situation may lead us if we do not act in time. Below I summarize what seem to me to be the points of greatest significance in this situation and this analysis. A more detailed examination of the facts and a more extended analysis is contained in a report on The Economic Situation at Midyear prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers which I am transmitting to the Congress along with this Midyear Economic Report Employment in the first half of this year ran continuously above the level of a year ago. Some workers were added to the labor force yet unemployment in June was only million less than a year earlier. June civilian employment set a new record of million Industrial production reached a new postwar peak in February and after the work stoppage in coal mining approached it again in June. Improved industrial relations and high business confidence reinforced by increased Government commitments for foreign aid and defense give promise of continuing high-level output for the rest of the year Agricultural production ran below the level of the first half of last year because smaller numbers of livestock and tight feed supplies have reduced the output of most livestock products. At midyear our second largest wheat crop was being harvested and generally favorable crop reports were highlighted by an indicated production of over billion bushels of corn a new record. While such a crop could not remedy the meat shortage during the rest of this year it would provide the basis for more ample supplies of livestock products in and thereafter Gross national product reached a new high of billion dollars per year during the first half of reflecting some increase in production but mostly the rise in prices Consumer income ran at an annual rate of about billion dollars compared with billion in Consumer income after taxes increased from a rate of billion dollars to a rate of billion Consumer expenditure as a result of some buyer hesitation in the first quarter increased less than disposable income leaving a small increase in net consumer saving The distribution of income according to the most recent data has changed but little since A survey of families however showed half the Nation 's consumer spending units falling substantially behind in the race of incomes with living costs during One-fourth of the family units spent more than they earned. Low-income people were spending past savings predominantly for current expenses higher-income people more often spending theirs for durable goods or converting them into residential or business investments Consumer credit continued to expand during the first half of Business investment took a larger share of the national output in the first half of than during Equipment outlays have been exceptionally high since the war ; plant construction expenditures have increased less strikingly. Present indications are that such outlays will continue high throughout the rest of the year. Nonfarm inventories increased markedly during the first quarter of the year when sales lagged but leveled off in the second quarter as sales picked up Profits exceeded last year 's average reflecting high prices for a high volume of output. First quarter data however indicated a drop in profits of small manufacturing firms Residential construction is expected to increase the total supply of dwelling units by more than a million during This high output has been accompanied by an increase in costs that is outrunning consumers ' ability to pay for the housing they need Net foreign investment at less than half the rate of the last quarter of in part reflected decreases in exports and increases in imports in our trade with all continents. The foreign aid program will increase our surplus of exports during the rest of the year The Federal cash surplus during the first half of amounted to billion dollars. Receipts ran percent higher than last year payments percent lower. The reduction in income taxes and the increase in expenditures for defense and foreign aid will virtually eliminate the surplus for the second half year. The Federal debt was reduced about billion dollars during the first half of the year bringing it down to billion dollars State and local government expenditures have overtaken revenues and deficits are likely to increase Prices rose after a decline in February. Many farm prices regained or surpassed their earlier levels and industrial prices resumed their climb. By midyear price increases appeared to be accelerating. The index of consumers ' prices has now reached an all-time high Wages continued the third round of increases that began last fall though interrupted by the break in commodity prices. Most of the third round increases have roughly corresponded to the rise in cost of living since the previous contract Foreign aid and defense expenditures during the present fiscal year will increase pressure on the domestic economy. New defense expenditures will not be great during the next few months but will rise thereafter. Both programs have a special impact upon such short-supply items as steel other metals and farm machinery and will draw increasingly upon our already fully employed labor force. More adequate allocation authority is needed if we are to avoid progressively more serious disruptive effects of these programs upon supplies prices and the organization of production The reduction in income taxes will reduce Federal revenues by about billion dollars at the same time that expenditures will be substantially increasing under the new programs. The deflationary influence of recent Government cash surpluses will thus be replaced by the inflationary influence of additional expenditures on the part of consumers whose tax burdens are reduced The general outlook as to inflation shows conflicting influences. On the one side the supply situation in a number of industries is improved over a year ago. Bountiful crops are in prospect. Postwar expansion programs are nearing completion in many lines of production and we should experience a gradual increase in output from an enlarged and modernized industrial plant. Commendable caution continues to be shown by business in avoiding speculative overexpansion and many leaders in both industry and labor can be applauded for the conscious restraint they have exhibited in their pricing policies and wage demands The immediate situation is dominated however by three interacting processes making for continued inflation. First consumer demand for goods and services business demand for investment goods and demands arising from expanding Government defense and foreign aid programs press strongly upon production. Second we are currently in the midst of a round of substantial wage and price increases in major basic industries. These developments foreshadow continuing and ramifying effects on cost structures and prices in many related lines of production on the cost of living and on further wage demands. Third credit expansion partly a cause and partly a result of inflation still persists The facts add up to a clear and disconcerting conclusion. In spite of some favorable factors we are in the very midst of gathering inflationary forces which day by day are imposing additional hardships upon countless families and day by day are undermining the foundations of the remarkably high level of postwar prosperity that we have thus far maintained The hard facts of today leave no room for complacency. Though most people are optimistic about the immediate business outlook lasting prosperity is not assured. Even in the midst of the present prosperity the average American sees that the value of his accumulated savings has declined and that many of his neighbors living on pensions or fixed salaries are actually worse off than they were a year ago. Looking abroad we see that despite great progress many countries are still far below the living standards needed for sustained production and are dependent on outside help for any hope of further advance. We must be on our guard lest our national prosperity and security be undermined by inflation at home or by misery abroad Our American prosperity depends in part on world events but far more on our own action or inaction right here at home. More than percent of all the goods and services that we produce are for domestic purposes But thus far we have shown a blind disregard of the dangers that beset our path. Despite my repeated warnings and recommendations we have not adopted adequate legislation for controlling inflation. The failure to control inflation effectively in the past makes it increasingly urgent that we adopt and apply vigorous measures to guide us safely from the uneven postwar boom to an era of sustained and stable prosperity We are now challenged to carry out the pledge to the American people contained in the Employment Act of that it shall be the policy of our Government to " utilize all its plans functions and resources * * * to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power/5 in an economy of free competitive enterprise It is no less important to take action to forestall a business collapse than it is to use Government measures to overcome a depression once it has arrived. Our success in this effort is essential for the reconstruction of a peaceful world Recommended Program ( Excerpt from the President 's Message to the Congress July ) Positive action by this Government is long overdue. It must be taken now I therefore urge the Congress to take strong positive action to control inflation. I have reexamined the anti-inflation program I proposed to the Congress months ago. In its essentials that program is as sound now as it was then. It has been revised and strengthened in the light of changing circumstances. The program I now propose is as follows : First I recommend that an excess-profits tax be reestablished in order to provide a Treasury surplus and provide a brake on inflation Second I recommend that consumer credit controls be restored in order to hold down inflationary credit Third I recommend that the Federal Reserve Board be given greater authority to regulate inflationary bank credit Fourth I recommend that authority be granted to regulate speculation on the commodity exchanges Fifth I recommend that authority be granted for allocation and inventory control of scarce commodities which basically affect essential industrial production or the cost of living Sixth I recommend that rent controls be strengthened and that adequate appropriations be provided for enforcement in order to prevent further unwarranted rent increases Seventh I recommend that stand-by authority be granted to ration those few products in short supply which vitally affect the health and welfare of our people. On the basis of present facts and unless further shortages occur this authority might not have to be used at all Eighth I recommend that price control be authorized for scarce commodities which basically affect essential industrial production or the cost of living. I have said before and I repeat that many profit margins have been adequate to absorb wage increases without the price increases that have followed. Rising wages and rising standards of living based on increasing productivity and a fair distribution of income is the American way. Noninflationary wage increases can and should continue to be made by free collective bargaining. Where the Government imposes a price ceiling wage adjustments which can be absorbed within the price ceiling should not be interfered with by the Government. The Government should have the authority however to limit wage adjustments which would force a break in a price ceiling except where wage adjustments are essential to remedy hardship to correct inequities or to prevent an actual lowering of living standards The measures I have recommended make up a balanced program to attack high prices. They are all necessary to check rising prices and safeguard our economy against the danger of depression. If they are made the first order of business by the Congress as they should be they can be promptly enacted. Every week of delay will mean additional hardship for the American people THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT BY THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Contents Page I. EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION AND PURCHASING POWER The course of employment The course of production Production prospects The flow of goods and purchasing power Consumer income expenditure and saving Business investment income and financing International transactions Government transactions Summary : the Nation 's Economic Budget II. PRICES WAGES AND THE IMPACT OF THREE GOVERNMENT ACTIONS The course of prices The course of wages The impact of three Government actions Foreign aid and domestic supply Defense demands and civilian supply The impact of tax reduction III T H E ISSUE BETWEEN INFLATION AND STABILIZATION APPENDIXES A. The Nation 's Economic Budget B. The Distribution of Consumer Income and Ownership of Liquid and Other Assets C. Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power III LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D. C July T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report The Economic Situation at Midyear in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ^ _/ ? ^ l/V ^ v Chairman Vice Chairman /W I. Employment Production and Purchasing Power E enter the second half of with our labor force fully employed with total production high and with inflationary pressures continuing. A review of some major economic events of the first half of will indicate where we stand and what trends can be foreseen W THE COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT The employment situation has continued strong with the demand for labor so active that a relatively large inflow of additional workers was readily absorbed. There were about more workers in the labor force in the first half of than a year ago nearly double the rise that would have been expected on the basis of population changes and prewar trends. This increase was due mainly to the abundance of job opportunities at good wages but it also appears that the pressure of living costs induced many housewives and teen-agers to seek jobs Total nonagricultural employment rose to record peacetime levels while agricultural employment was somewhat below In June civilian employment stood at million compared with million a year earlier ( See chart and appendix G table ) Thus " sixty million jobs " becomes a floor to be protected by every means possible in the future no longer an objective that the faint-hearted said our business enterprise could not attain With more than million in civilian employment the unemployment figures have continued low. There were million persons unemployed in June of this year compared with million in June While some workers in certain areas had difficulty in finding suitable work there has been no general unemployment problem. In fact some employers have continued to have trouble in securing the types of labor they needed The broad underlying demand for additional workers has been felt in almost all major lines. Construction has been setting the pace but significant gains have occurred also in manufacturing finance and services Employment in mining transportation and public utilities and government has changed little. ( See appendix G table ) On the other hand the leather industry experienced a greater than usual seasonal downturn this spring followed by a substantial recovery in June Employment in the rubber industry has been declining steadily averaging about percent below the first half of CHART LABOR FORCE Civilian employment in June exceeded million for the first time Unemployment continued at a very low level MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * TOTAL LABOR FORCE * YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE THE COURSE OF PRODUCTION Total production has maintained very high levels. The output of industrial goods ( including minerals and manufactured goods ) for the months was not quite percent above the average level. ( See chart and appendix C tables and ) As to particular industries the volume of construction and the output of electric and gas utilities have both been running considerably higher than last year. Transportation just about equaled the levels of a year ago. Basic industries such as steel chemicals and construction have operated close to present capacities. The petroleum industry has had difficulty keeping up with demand even though running with wide open throttle. Consumers ' goods continued in general at high-level production The short corn crop of resulted in a tight feed situation and in combination with declining numbers of livestock led to reduced marketings of livestock products in the first half of The total volume of farm marketings in the first half of this year was about percent below the level of a year earlier The output of goods would have been even higher but for certain specific shortages notably of fuel electric power freight cars and steel. These shortages continue to impede expansion but there has been some improvement over While industrial disputes particularly in coal mining reduced output considerably in March and April the return of coal mining to normal operation has resulted in a substantial improvement in industrial output during May and June. By midyear industrial production approximately regained the postwar peak reached in February. The fragmentary evidence available indicates some improvement in labor productivity during the first half of PRODUCTION PROSPECTS The heavy demands of consumers business government and foreign buyers for the output of American farms and industries emphasize the urgent need to expand production. The production outlook for the coming half year is good but not significantly better than in the last half of or the first half of this year Since we are currently operating at maximum employment and maximum capacity in most fields any further increase in production is dependent largely upon increased efficiency and improved technology. Such gains can not be very great in the short span of a few months or a single year Other factors such as weather industrial relations and business psychology are likely to have a far more influential short-run effect On these counts the immediate prospect seems promising. Industrial relations while disturbed in some industries promise to be better than they were in the first half of the year particularly since relatively few major wage contracts come up for negotiation in the late summer and fall Forward commitments under the foreign aid and defense programs added to the vigor of the domestic market give confidence to merchants manufacturers and bankers In June there were million more persons working in nonagricultural employment than a year ago. The flow of materials while still not adequate in the durable goods fields should permit production to proceed with fewer interruptions than we have witnessed during the past CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION Industrial production has remained fairly steady since last September PERCENT OF AVERAGE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I t I I I I I I I NONDURABLE MANUFACTURES I I I I I I I yi I I I I I I I I t I I I I I I I I t I I I I I I I I I SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM I I L__L_L_t I I t I I i ^ year. There is a likelihood that nonagricultural production in the second half of the year may be slightly higher than it was in the first half In agriculture the season of damaging floods is past and present crop prospects are excellent. If the favorable weather we have enjoyed so far this season should continue we may hope for a record-breaking corn crop and a general level of crop production rivaling the best previous year Animal products present a different picture. The number of cattle on farms and ranches has been declining since Dairy-cow numbers are down to prewar levels. Sheep numbers are the lowest in over years There are fewer hogs on farms than last year and the spring pig crop was down percent. The numbers both of laying hens and of young chickens are lower than a year ago. The combination of the reduced livestock population and the continuing tight feed supply means inevitably that the output of most livestock products will continue to run less than last year until some months after the new corn crop comes in this fall Favorable crops may more than offset the unfavorable livestock prospect to make the total output of our farms somewhat higher than last year. But in the case of crops especially much of this year 's production does not come to market until next year. A bumper corn crop may even reduce this year 's meat production by encouraging holding animals over for heavier feeding. Consequently farm marketings in physical terms will continue to run less than a year ago. For as a whole they will probably be down or percent. Domestic consumption of food for will show about the same decrease around percent on a per capita basis. Food exports will be down somewhat but the reduction will be chiefly in cereals and to a smaller degree in edible fats and oils. Meat and most other livestock products the shortage of which will be most keenly felt in coming months have been exported in only relatively minor amounts Domestic food consumption will continue above prewar levels. But in relation to postwar levels of demand we must expect during the remainder of a relatively tight supply of food which is the largest component in the workers ' cost of living THE FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER The gross national product that is the total value of goods and services which ran at an annual rate of billion dollars during the first half of and billion during the second half rose to an annual rate of billion during the first half of ( See appendix G table ) The increasing flow of income and expenditures can best be shown in the accounts of consumers domestic business international transactions and government Consumer income expenditure and saving Consumer income. Personal income which expanded at an annual rate of nearly billion dollars from the first half of to the second half leveled off in at approximately the December rate of billion dollars. ( See appendix C table ) Employment and wage rates continued to increase but the upward trend in cash farm income was very slight TABLE Per capita disposable income current dollars and dollars Personal income after taxes Current dollars Period 1939__ Annual rates seasonally adjusted : First half Second half._ __ _ ______ First half ._ dollars _ * Deflated by the consumers ' price index which does not fully reflect changes in the cost of living of all groups of consumers Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. The figures in this table are based on revised estimates and are different from those published in previous Economic Reports of the President Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor. ( See appendix O table ) Real per capita purchasing power dropped from to as stated in earlier reports. No measurable change occurred in the first half of this year the rise in the overall average of money income per person being * just about offset by the rise in retail prices In a period of rising prices and high living costs the distribution of consumer income becomes increasingly important. Of particular significance is the progressive deterioration in the economic position of those individuals and families whose dollar incomes have fallen far behind in the race with rising prices. Comprehensive statistics on income distribution for the first half of this year are not available. A survey comparing and showed that percent of all families ( spending units ) had no appreciable increase in dollar incomes and almost percent suffered a reduction during a period when consumer prices increased nearly percent While the disappearance of large-scale unemployment and the increase in the number of gainfully employed persons per family tended to narrow the disparity among incomes during the war period and immediately thereafter this trend has been arrested more recently. As there are relatively more people with fixed incomes in the lower income brackets than in the higher brackets the favorable effects of full employment upon the distribution of income have been offset by the unfavorable effects of inflation during the past year. Of the family units whose dollar incomes remained stationary between and according to the same survey two-thirds were in income brackets of $ or less. ( See appendix B table ) In addition old people were found more frequently among those with stable or declining incomes than among those with increasing incomes Consumer expenditures. Consumer expenditures were at an annual rate of about billion dollars during the half year compared with about billion during the second half of The increase was slightly less than the increase in income after taxes indicating a small increase in saving The first quarter of was a period of consumer hesitation in which purchasing of both durables and nondurables lagged. In the second quarter there was a general strengthening of consumer demand. This reaction was due only in minor degree to price adjustments and resulted mainly from a general feeling that prices were again headed upward and that scarcities might develop from the unsettled international situation. Tax reduction exerted some further stimulating effect although the full effect on consumer disposable income will not be felt until the second half of the year The upturn in expenditures was marked in the field of household appliances although it applied generally to all types of consumer purchases Consumer saving. Previous reports have stressed the decline in the rate of net consumer saving since the war years. They have pointed out that as consumers spent an increasing proportion of their incomes they contributed to inflationary pressures that pushed up the price level. At the same time the process of inflation was itself causing many families to save less in order to prevent serious impairment of their standard of living Estimates for the past months seem to indicate that the postwar downward trend of saving has been interrupted although the nature of the statistical methods by which these estimates are derived is such that no great importance can be attached to small changes in percentages. ( See chart and appendix G table ) An appraisal of the significance of this change requires an analysis of the composition of saving and dissaving. The estimates include in saving such items as the purchase of homes and noncorporate business investment and it is chiefly into these categories that the increasing volume of saving appears to be flowing. The rate of accumulation of liquid assets cash bank deposits and Government bonds may actually have decreased. ( See appendix B table ) It is savings of this latter type that are most clearly anti-inflationary Furthermore aggregate figures of net consumer saving do not reveal the numbers of families who spend more than they earn. The rise in the cost of living is causing this practice among many low-income families as well as many large families and families of fixed income in the middle-income groups. In the immediate postwar period spending in excess of income was CONSUMER INCOME SPENDING AND SAVING Consumer income half of rose * more than spending in the first BILLIONS OF DOCLARS DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME ( PERSONAL INCOME LESS TAXES ) BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ^ DISPOSABLE INCOME > B1- iB ^ finSBBi HHHI H i I resulting in an increase in saving I S883S8S t i PERCENT ~ * ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ! concentrated among families with incomes of $ or less. More recently as durable goods have become available an increasing number of families with incomes up to $ or even $ have become dissavers. In more than one-fourth of all families were spending more than they earned Closely related to the rate of and distribution of saving out of current earnings is the ownership of liquid assets. Personal holdings of liquid assets including currency and deposits in banks and savings and loan companies and Government bonds were billion at the beginning of this year. This is nearly three times as high as at the beginning of the war in dollar terms Of the total of billion dollars of personal holdings about billion were in the control of trust funds and about billion in the hands of individuals. The equity of individuals in private insurance is now over billion dollars compared with billion at the end of while the equity in the Government social-security funds has risen from only billion dollars to over billion now Between and there was a small increase in the proportion of the population owning no liquid assets at all. The median size of the holdings of all spending units was $ in early compared with $ in As shown in appendix B table less than one-half of persons with incomes under $ had either liquid assets or life insurance and percent of the Nation 's spending units had no liquid assets or less than $ worth of liquid assets early this year Declines in liquid asset holdings or increases in debt should not be interpreted as indicating distress in all cases. In fact the largest reduction in liquid assets has been made by families in the middle and high-income brackets. However available data indicate that families in the lowerincome groups in percent of the cases reduced their liquid assets for the purchase of nondurable goods and services while in the upper-income groups the purchase of houses and other investments were a particularly important component. Thus to a considerable extent the assets at the lower end of the income scale are being dissipated by current living expenses while those in the upper-income groups are being converted into other types of property. ( See appendix B table ) In line with recent trends in the distribution of saving and liquid assets consumer credit has continued to expand rapidly. At the end of June the total amount of consumer credit outstanding reached the record total of billion dollars almost billion higher than a year ago. ( See appendix C table ) Although the amount of outstanding consumer credit is not large in comparison with the current level of consumer incomes the rapid expansion of consumer credit continues to add to inflationary pressures Business investment income and financing Business investment as a whole absorbed an even greater share of the total national output of goods and services in the first half of this year than in The expansion improvement and replacement of productive facilities and housing and the enlargement of business working capital to support record levels of output and sales continued to swell the demand for goods and services in competition with the demands of consumers Government and the export market While postwar replenishment of depleted inventories is by and large accomplished and productive capacity has been adequately expanded in a large number of industries there is no general speculative overexpansion of inventories plant and equipment or housing. All indications for the remainder of this year at least are that the volume of business investment will continue more than adequate to make the total demand for goods and services match the supply at current prices. Shortages and inflation will continue to be the dominant concern. This will be true even if inventory policies remain cautious and nonspeculative Plant and equipment. A decade and a half of subnormal business expansion resulting in part from depression and war set the stage for heavy postwar business investment. The upward trend brought plant and equipment outlays to a peak in the latter part of In the first months of such outlays totaled billion dollars. This represented an annual dollar rate nearly double that of percent above the first half of and percent below the second half. ( See appendix C table ) The postwar plant and equipment boom has shown significant changes of pattern. During the first stages of reconversion the intense pressure to replace facilities and to restore civilian output took precedence over the introduction of innovations. More recently there has been increasing emphasis upon cost reduction and the substitution of new products and techniques. As table shows expenditures for equipment alone have accounted for an exceptionally high portion of total plant and equipment outlays and of gross national product in the postwar period. Plant construction expenditures on the other hand are now smaller relative to gross national product than in any year from through Some of this increased emphasis on equipment reflects a long-standing trend. Some reflects the fact that plant construction costs have risen much farther above prewar levels than equipment prices At midyear the short-run outlook is for continued high outlays on plant and equipment. The foreign aid and defense programs though slow to affect requirements for capital goods have firmed up business confidence and have extended expansion plans further into the future. Unfilled orders of equipment producers while substantially lower than in the middle of last year are still unusually high in relation to sales and are being whittled down very slowly. Conditions in individual industries vary but the overall rate of investment in plant and equipment seems limited not so much by demand or funds as by the supply of materials. Surveys of business intentions indicate that the dollar rate of plant and equipment investment in the second half of will be about the same as in the second half of and the first half of The longer-range outlook is less clear. Whether or not the present rate of plant and equipment investment is larger than could or should continue over the long run is a question to be answered only by a comprehensive and dettailed analysis of long-term needs. The Council of Economic Advisers is now making such a study TABLE Private outlays for new nonfarm plant and equipment as percent of gross national product Percent of gross national product Total plant and equipment average-1929 .,__ average- average._ : First half i_ Industrial commercial and public utility new construction Period Nonfarm producers ' durable equipment i Preliminary estimates based on rate of increase from to the first half of in the plant and equipment expenditures made jointly by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Department of Commerce. ( See appendix C table ) NOTE. The plant and equipment expenditures on which the percentages in this table are based differ from the Securities and Exchange Commission-Department of Commerce series primarily because certain plant and equipment outlays charged to current account are included in the former and excluded from the latter series Source : Department of Commerce ( ) Business inventories. During the first quarter of the book value of nonfarm business inventories increased about billion dollars compared with billion in the first quarter of Allowing for seasonal factors the increase in physical volume amounted to about billion dollars or an annual rate of nearly billion. Stocks of finished goods increased not only at the retail level but also in the hands of producers. The principal cause of these increases was a more than seasonal decline in sales ( For detail on inventories and sales see appendix C tables and ) In the second quarter of more favorable market conditions and the restriction of some supplies terminated the rise in the volume of nonfarm inventories and such stocking-up as had occurred earlier in the year was overtaken by rising sales. The total physical volume of nonfarm inventories adjusted for seasonal variation showed practically no change Present business policies and expectations indicate the reestablishment of a moderately rising trend. But although business sentiment has improved caution in forward buying has continued. There is little indication that inventories generally are either excessive or deficient in relation to current sales levels though they would soon become excessive if sales should decline materially Business income. Profits for the first half of were at levels above the average of the previous peak year. Preliminary data for the first half year indicate that corporate profits before taxes were at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about billion dollars compared with billion in and a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion in the fourth quarter of that year. Corporate profits after taxes thus far in have been at an annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion in and billion after seasonal adjustment in the fourth quarter. ( See appendix G table ) These profits after taxes in represented a return of about percent on net worth and about percent on sales compared with about percent on net worth and about percent on sales in The net income of unincorporated business and the professions in the first half of was at an annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion for as a whole and an annual rate of billion in the fourth quarter. ( See appendix C table ) In addition net farm income was running at an annual rate of billion dollars during the first half of this year compared with about billion for as a whole and an annual rate of billion in the fourth quarter. These estimates of net farm income reflect an unusually large statistical adjustment for changes in farm inventories on account of the small corn corp and the reduction in numbers of livestock last year. Net income actually realized by farm operators during the first half of ( without allowing for changes in inventories ) is estimated to have run slightly below the 18-billion-dollar record level of The sharp price advances during the second half of and the maintenance this year of high levels of production and sales despite unusually bad weather conditions and work stoppages in some critical areas have accounted for the high level of profits thus far in With the outlook bright for a sustained level of production during the remainder of this year aggregate profits are likely to continue at high levels A development to be watched is an apparent drop in the profitability of small manufacturing corporations in the first quarter of this year while profit ratios for the largest corporations rose. Average profits after taxes of manufacturing corporations with assets under $ dropped from percent on sales in to percent in the first quarter of ( For further details on corporate profits see appendix C tables ) Business financing. Chart and appendix C table show the principal ways in which corporations used their funds during the first half of and also the principal sources from which these funds were obtained Corporate outlays for plant and equipment and for the expansion of inventories and customer financing amounted to about billion dollars in the first half of this year. This represents outlays at a rate somewhat CHART SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS Internal sources mainly retained net earnings and depreciation reserves continued to supply the major part of corporate financial requirements during the first half of BILLIONS OF DOLLARS USES SOURCES RETAINED NET EARNINGS AND : DEPLETION ALLOWANCES NET NEW SECURITY 0THER * lllllllllllllllllllll CASH AND U. S. SECURITIES J * SEE APPENDIX C _J _ TABLE 3O SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA ) lower than for the year as a whole. A small decline in the use of funds for expanding inventories and a large decline in the rate of expansion of customer financing more than offset the increase in expenditures on plant and equipment It is significant that the major source of corporate funds has continued to be those sums retained from current receipts as offsets to depreciation and depletion charges and as undistributed net earnings. Indications are that this source will be even more important in as a whole than during last year Net new security issues during the half year amounting to billion dollars have risen in importance compared with the first half of when they provided billion. The proportion of new issues represented by common stock has continued at about the same low level that prevailed last year reflecting in part the heavy participation of those business groups chiefly utilities which characteristically make greater use of debt financing Although the current ratio of common stock to total net new issues is low by prewar standards the average ratio for the whole postwar period to date has not been. Moreover corporate equity/debt ratios in general still compare quite favorably with those prevailing in prewar periods As a corollary of the high degree of internal financing through retained earnings and additions to depreciation reserves and of the volume of security issues the use of corporate reserves of cash and securities represented a relatively minor source of financing during and during the first half of There was no net expansion of bank credit to corporations as a group in the first half of The total of such loans outstanding showed a decrease for the half year in contrast with a small increase during the first half of In appraising this decline in corporate use of bank credit however the high rate of expansion of such credit in the latter part of must be borne in mind. ( See appendix G table ) While there are disparities in the ease with which businesses of different types and sizes can acquire funds the overall picture does not indicate a present or impending insufficiency of such funds so long as the fundamental business outlook remains good. If that outlook becomes less favorable the originating point of the downturn is likely to be found elsewhere than in the availability of funds Residential construction. About new residential units in new buildings were started during the half year. Counting also conversions and alterations more than a million units will probably be added to the residential supply during This volume of residential construction is already straining the capacities of the construction industry in many areas and of producers of some construction materials and is unquestionably competing with other primary national needs. ( See appendix C table ) This situation highlights what has become the chronic necessity of developing and applying new methods and substitute materials to the house-building industry On the demand side a distinction needs to be drawn between essential need and capacity to pay current costs. The basic housing needs of a growing population in the face of a serious and cumulative shortage would be sufficient to sustain the present level or even a higher level of home building for many years to come. But only a few years at most would be required to saturate the demand of those who can acquire houses at current costs and that saturation would portend a serious downswing in lesidential construction. The unusually high level of current demand for houses has combined with the unique character of the building industry to push homebuyers ' costs far more above those prevailing after World War I than consumer incomes have risen in the same time span. During the past year the average price of new houses has risen about percent while average family income after taxes was only about percent higher during the first half of than during the same period in Another way of looking at the effect of high residential prices on the economy is to examine the trend in outstanding mortgage debt on one- to four-family residential properties. This type of mortgage debt has risen about percent since the end of while nonfarm family incomes after taxes have risen only about percent and the number of dwelling units has increased less than percent. It is highly significant that the volume of new mortgages of less than $ placed since amounts to approximately billion dollars which is about percent of the face value of all outstanding mortgages on one- to four-family residential properties Even after allowance for payments already made on these new mortgages this means that a high proportion of indebtedness on residential properties has been placed on the basis of current prices. Even at the high level of current incomes high housing costs have imposed excessive burdens on many families. These burdens hard to carry in good times would impose a serious strain indeed with any downturn in employment or incomes. The problem of housing costs is important in the short run and of central significance to the longer-range aspects of general economic stability Farm investment and finance. Production and domestic sales of farm machinery have continued to expand. Wheel-type tractor production for as a whole is expected to exceed the record production by at least or percent. Demand for most types of farm tractors and some other machinery and equipment items continues to outrun supply but the situation is more spotty than a year ago and for many items production has caught up with demand at present prices. The progress of construction on farms reflects the higher incomes of farm families Preliminary indications are that the boom in farm real estate has tended to level out in most regions following the break in commodity prices early this year. The amount of farm mortgages recorded in the first quarter of was slightly larger than in the first quarter of but the number of new mortgages decreased. Total farm mortgage debt is still much below prewar levels. Non-real-estate loans to farmers however apparently are continuing to expand in response to the higher level of farm costs International transactions The net foreign investment component of the Nation 's Economic Budget dropped from an annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of to billion in the first half of This figure represents the portion of the excess of exports over imports of goods and services that is financed by loans and investments and by net liquidation of foreign dollar assets and gold. It does not include the portion financed by gifts and other unilateral transfers made by the United States Government and the general public. When these are included the decline was much less : from an annual rate of billion dollars to about billion the lowest level since The excess of exports over imports of goods and services reached its low point in the first quarter of the year and rose only slightly in the second quarter as shown in table TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars annual rate ] Exports of Imports of goods and goods and services > services Period average First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter,.. Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter _ Surplus of exports of goods and services Includes income on investments ' Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce. ( See appendix C table ) The decline in the export surplus reflected chiefly changes in the exchange of goods rather than services. Lower exports and higher imports of goods characterized our trade with every continent. While the value of exports fell their average prices continued to rise. The sharp decline in value thus reflected an even greater decline in the physical quantity of goods shipped to foreign countries. The physical quantity of goods exported in the first half of this year was at a rate percent less than in the last quarter of and percent less than in the second quarter of ( See appendix C tables ) More than half of the increase in imports reflected a rise in physical quantities. ( See appendix C table ) Production of exportable goods has increased in some of the areas that supply us. There is increased pressure in many countries moreover to divert to the United States goods that might otherwise be sold in the home market or in foreign countries that do not pay for them in dollars The depletion of foreign gold and dollar assets which was an important cause of the decline in our export surplus was reflected in the reduced role that liquidation of these reserves played in its financing. As table shows these resources were being liquidated at a rate of only billion dollars a year in the first half of less than half the rate. ( See chart ) Foreign countries ' spending of gold and dollar balances was one of the important factors in the expansion of our domestic money supply and bank reserves in There was an increase in the rate of utilization of Government aid in the first half of this year compared with the last quarter of but it was CHART FINANCING THE EXPORT SURPLUS A sharp drop in the liquidation of foreign assets was the main financial factor in reducing the export surplus from the average level of to the first half of U. S. Government aid dropped slightly BILLIONS OF DOLLARS 1st half ( Annual rate ) NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT U. S. GOVERNMENT AID EXPORT SURPLUS * INCLUDES ALSO MOVEMENT OF'U. S. PRIVATE CAPITAL NET DOLLAR DISBURSEMENTS BY THE INTERNATIONAL BANK AND THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND ERRORS AND OMISSIONS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE largely aid to Europe and did not ease the dollar position of other areas which accounted for the major decline in our export surplus Our international transactions in the first half of the year involved less drain and exerted less inflationary pressure on our economy than they had in The undertaking of new foreign aid programs in the past months however presages an increase in the export surplus in the second half of this year TABLE Financing the surplus of goods and services supplied to foreign countries [ Billions of dollars annual rate ] Period Means of financing Surplus of Liquidation exports of goods and Government of foreign Other means gold and services * aid ( net ) * dollar assets of financing ( net ) * ( net ) average First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter..._ Fourth quarter.. First quarter Second quarter K Includes income on investments a Includes grants and loans but excludes subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund For detail see appendix C table Excludes assets held by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund * Includes private gifts and remittances movement of United States private capital net dollar disbursements by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund and errors and omissions * Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce Government transactions During the first half of the calendar year Federal cash receipts trom the public under the impact of rising prices and incomes continued their upward trend. Allowing for seasonal influences receipts during these months were running at an annual rate of billion dollars or percent above the figure of billion. Thus for this period the cash surplus was running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars compared with the surplus of billion Actual cash taken in during the first months of the magnitude of which partly reflected the heavy concentration of income tax collections in the spring amounted to billion dollars or billion greater than actual cash payments in this period. The surplus during the second half of this year however will be drastically reduced. This change is due mainly to the reduction in income tax rates and to the increase in payments on account of the defense and foreign aid programs. Even after seasonal adjustment to allow for the fact that receipts are normally substantially greater during the first half of any calendar year than during the second it is certain that the cash surplus will drastically decline from the first half of the year to the second TABLE Federal cash receipts from and cash payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Cash receipts other than borrowing Calendar years _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted : First half i Second half Totals for half years not adjusted for seasonal : First half K _. _ Second half a __ Cash payments Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) T i Based on incomplete data * Estimates Source : Bureau of the Budget State and local government spending continued to rise during the first half of so that the cash surplus of has disappeared. This trend in State and local transactions is likely to continue so that a cash deficit must probably be expected for the rest of this year TABLE Cash receiptsfromand cash payments to the public by State and local governments [ Billions of dollars ] Cash receipts other than borrowing Calendar year _ First half ( annual rate seasonally a d j u s t e d ) i _ Cash payments * Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) i Excludes Federal grants-in-aid * Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce In connection with the foregoing discussion it should be noted that governmental cash transactions differ considerably from receipts and expenditures as shown in conventional budgetary accounts. While some of these differences tend to balance out over a period of years the analysis of cash transactions presents a more comprehensive and a more accurate basis for appraising the immediate economic impact of Government operations. The conventional budget accounts however are more significantif the long-range financial position of the Government is to be shown As an example transfers from budget accounts to trust accounts are not shown as payments to the public while they do reflect an increase in Government liabilities which will result in payments in later years. ( For further explanation see appendix A tables and ) Payments. During the first half of this year total Federal cash payments to the public were running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about billion dollars or some billion dollars ( percent ) below the rate for The decline was chiefly in payments for national defense and international affairs and represented a shrinkage of certain extraordinary payments rather than a reduction in continuing programs. In national defense the decrease was accounted for in part by the tapering off of the cashing in of terminal leave bonds. The falling off of cash payments in the international field was due to the exhaustion of the British loan and to the fact that payments to the Bretton Woods organizations were heavily concentrated in Payments under foreign aid and other international programs are expected to expand from an annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of to billion in the second half. This will still be below the level Payments for defense likewise will rise because of increased procurement of equipment and some expansion of the armed forces. Thus after declining for the past years Federal payments are now expected to rise ; during the second half of they will probably reach an annual rate of billion dollars which is about percent higher than during the first half of the year and slightly less than in ( See appendix A table ) The major changes in payments by functions discussed in the preceding paragraphs are reflected somewhat differently in payments classified by type of recipient. ( See appendix A table ) Federal purchases of goods and services from business for example were at an annual rate of billion dollars during the first half of this year or percent above the level and they are expected to average during the second half of this year about percent above last year 's rate. The increase during the second half of the year is accounted for largely by the increasing defense and foreign-aid programs. Some of the increase in over is simply a statistical reflection of the shift from loans to outright grants in support of foreign aid. Federal salaries and wages during the first half of were a little below the level of billion dollars but are expected under the influence of pay increases and expansion of the armed forces to return to their level during the second half of the year. The aggregate of payments other than purchases from business Federal salaries and international loans and other payments changes only moderately Payments of State and local governments have continued to rise steadily reflecting increases in costs and also the expansion of activities to make up for the restrictions of the war period and to meet new needs. The average rate of cash payments during the first half of was about billion dollars or billion above the level and this rising trend is expected to persist during the second half of the year State and local construction activity is continuing its rapid expansion in response to the pressure of urgent needs for new schools streets and highways and water and sewer systems. ( See appendix C table ) In terms of dollar volume State and local construction during is expected to be about percent above the level compared with increases of about percent for private construction and about percent for Federal construction. In view of rising costs these dollar figures considerably overstate the expansion in construction. The physical volume of Federal construction for example will probably be little different from the level and the real expansion in the private and State and local sectors is correspondingly lower than indicated by the dollar figures Receipts and debt management. Actual Federal cash receipts during the first months of were billion dollars which is equivalent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion. For the second half of the year the prospect is for a decline in actual cash receipts substantially greater than seasonal from billion dollars to billion dollars or a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion. Over a full year 's operation the new tax bill might be expected provided present income levels were not pushed upward by the forces of inflation to reduce revenues by about billion dollars. Assuming some increase in present income levels the tax reduction accounts for the largest part in the expected fall in total cash receipts. Most of this decline is in personal income taxes only a small fraction being due to reductions in estate and gift taxes. Receipts from sales of surplus property are also expected to fall sharply during the second half of the year while other receipts will show little change The annual rate of cash receipts of State and local governments during the first half of was somewhat higher than in These increased receipts reflected higher tax rates introduction of new taxes ( especially sales taxes ) and rising incomes sales and property valuations. Revenues from sales taxes during the first quarter of for example were percent above the same period of State and local governments continue to seek new sources of revenue to meet expenditures which are mounting faster than receipts About billion dollars of the Federal budgetary surplus during the first half of was used to retire public debt. Furthermore the net increase in the public debt holdings of Federal trust funds and the net increase in the amount of savings bonds and notes outstanding made additional funds available to retire marketable debt held outside of the Government. In consequence the marketable debt was reduced by about billion dollars during the first half of Debt held by commercial and Federal Reserve banks was reduced by about billion dollars. The gross public debt which was just under billion dollars at the end of was thus reduced to about billion at the end of June while the Treasury cash balance increased from about billion dollars to nearly billion during that period. ( See appendix C table ) The reduction in bank-held debt was an important factor in the decline of about billion dollars in the money supply which occurred during the period. ( See appendix C table ) Throughout the period public debt retirements were concentrated in the first instance on debt held by the Federal Reserve banks. However the restrictive effect of debt retirements was offset in considerable measure by the gold inflow by return of currency from circulation and by open-market purchases of Government securities by the Federal Reserve System. Such purchases were necessary to support the prices of bonds as banks and others sold securities in order to maintain reserves and to obtain funds for other purposes. Nevertheless the budget surplus and debt retirement placed some pressure on commercial bank reserves and were to some extent a contributory factor to the slow-down of commercial bank loan expansion which occurred during the period State and local debt continued to expand. It was possible during war years with high revenues and severely limited activities to retire a substantial fraction of outstanding debt ; but the pressure of new needs since the war has brought a return to the prewar picture of steadily growing physical assets and indebtedness. State and municipal securities issues to secure new capital were billion dollars in or more than twice as great as in A substantial amount of borrowing was for the purpose of securing funds for payment of veterans ' bonuses This survey of the transactions of Federal State and local governments indicates that during the first half of their combined effect continued to serve as a strong factor of restraint on the force of inflation. During the second half of the year this restraining influence will be almost wholly lost. The Federal Government is faced with the prospect of decreased revenues and increased expenditures. While State and local governments are raising tax rates and levying new taxes their expenditures continue to exuand faster than their revenues Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget is a convenient way of summarizing the main trends in the flow of goods and purchasing power and of relating these trends to possible future developments The Nation 's Economic Budget total representing gross national income or expenditure in dollar terms increased by percent from to the first half of ( annual rate ) ( See chart ) This is a rate of increase somewhat below the rise that took place in the preceding year A large part of the increase in as in reflects the rise in prices and wages ; there was however also some increase in the real flow of goods and services. The inflationary tendencies that prevailed particularly in the second half of continued in though at a reduced rate TABLE The Nation 's Economic Budget [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year first half annual rates seasonally adjustedi Calendar year Account Receipts Consumers : Disposable income Expenditures Saving ( ) Business : Undistributed profits and reserves Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) International : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Government ( Federal State and local ) : Cash receipts from the public Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) _ Adjustments.... Total gross national product Excess of receipts ExRependi- ( ) or ceipts tures expenditures ( ) tures ( ) Excess of receipts Expendi- ( ) or tures expendi- i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A for sources and explanatory material Comparing the composition of the Nation 's Economic Budget in the first half of the current year with the preceding year the similarities appear more significant than the changes that have occurred. The largest items in the Nation 's Economic Budget are consumer income and expenditures Their share in the Nation 's Economic Budget total remains approximately constant with percent and percent for consumer income and consumer expenditures respectively. These percentages large as they are are somewhat below those that prevailed in most peacetime years in the past. Large national and international government programs and large business investment compete with consumer expenditures for limited national resources. The sum of business international and government accounts in the Nation 's Economic Budget maintained a relatively large share in the total ; but there were quite substantial changes in the relationship among these accounts Gross private domestic investment increased relatively more than any other major category in the Nation 's Economic Budget. This was due to CHART THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET Consumer saving and the Government surplus increased between and first half of while the excess of business and foreign investment declined FIRST HALF ( BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ) * CONSUMERS EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES ( ) RECEIPTS ( ) BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL I EXCESS OF INVESTMENT GOVERNMENT CASH SURPLUS QALENDAR YEAR ( BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ) CONSUMERS CONSUMER SAVING EXCESS OF INVESTMENT INTERNATIONAL i EXCESS OF INVESTMENT GOVERNMENT CASH I SURPLUS I * ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED NOTE : THE COMPONENTS DO NOT ADD TO THE GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT BECAUSE OF CERTAIN SEE APPENDIX A SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX A ADJUSTMENTS increases in new construction and inventory accumulation. Present indications are that domestic investment will continue on a high level during the remainder of the year Net foreign investment declined by more than half during the first months of The increase in Government foreign assistance during the second half of the year will in large part take the form of grants which are recorded in government expenditures rather than in net foreign investment. For this reason the net foreign investment component of the Nation 's Economic Budget will probably not rise even though the total excess of exports of goods and services increases Government payments have been declining since the war peak and showed a further slight decline during the last months. Because of the increase in Federal outlays for defense and foreign aid and the continuing increase in State-local payments this trend is likely to be reversed. An increase in government payments therefore appears certain for the coming 6-month period Thus it seems likely that expenditures for private domestic investment will continue at a high level while the decline in government payments will be reversed. In the present situation of full employment and capacity production this makes for a situation of inflationary pressure The picture of an unstable economy is presented even more clearly when attention is focused upon the excess of receipts or expenditures as presented for each year in the third column in table Both in and during the first months of the excess of investments and exports in the business and international accounts was largely offset by consumer net saving plus the government cash surplus. Between these two periods the excess of business investment increased by nearly billion dollars as did the Government surplus. The most important change in the Nation 's Economic Budget that is bound to occur under present legislation for the coming period is that this Government cash surplus will be drastically reduced. This means that by necessity other items of saving or excess of investment must adjust themselves correspondingly It should be recognized that the large dollar amounts of individual saving and Government cash surplus that helped to balance the large excess investments and excess exports during the last years were partly a result of the inflationary process. When incomes and prices are inflated the amounts of saving and taxes tend to increase. Thus we have in our economic structure a kind of automatic emergency brake that helps to slow down inflation. By reducing tax rates despite inflationary prospects we have acted like an engineer who releases his emergency brake in the face of an emergency. The question for the coming months is whether once again we will permit a price rise to balance the Nation 's economic accounts in the precarious manner that is characteristic of an inflationary movement Looking at the Nation 's Economic Budget from the long-range aspect of economic stability it appears also that major adjustments still remain to be made if a peacetime economy of sustained prosperity is to be achieved The sum total of business investment net foreign investment and government expenditures will probably require a smaller share in the Nation 's Economic Budget total than in recent years. That means that in a future expanded economy consumer income and expenditures will require a larger share in order to assure markets for everything that can be produced Adjustments that must be made eventually in order to assure sustained prosperity are not appearing in the course of unchecked inflation. By permitting further inflation we render the future task of transition to a condition of sustained prosperity that much more difficult II. Prices Wages and the Impact of Three Government Actions T HE first half of has shown several important developments and at times cross currents in the process of market competition collective bargaining and price making through which our system of free enterprise operates THE COURSE OF PRICES As closed both wholesale and consumers ' prices were at postwar peaks after sharp advances in the second half of which carried wholesale prices to percent and consumers ' prices to percent above the mid-1946 level. Early this year this trend was broken by a sharp downturn in commodity prices but during the second quarter prices again marched forward. At midyear of the level of wholesale prices was percent higher and the level of consumers ' prices was percent higher than at the start of the year. As we enter the third quarter of price rises are occurring on a broad front though somewhat more selective in character than a year ago The course of wholesale prices and consumers ' prices has varied considerably. During the first quarter there was a sharp break in farm products and foods which carried the wholesale price index substantially downward. In the second quarter farm products almost regained and foods more than regained the ground lost earlier in the year. ( See chart and appendix C table ) Wholesale prices other than farm products and foods were strong with a slight upward movement. Three commodity areas in particular showed advances in wholesale prices in response to strong pressures of manufacturing and construction demand. ( See chart ) These were fuel and lighting materials ( notably coal ) metals and metal products and building materials. The second quarter saw prices increase for such important nonferrous metals as lead tin and aluminum. At the same time weakness in a number of cotton-textile products reflected a reduction in demand and a much easier supply position. The one major industrial price index which showed a net decline for the whole period was hides and WHOLESALE PRICES Wholesale prices showed little net change during the first half of because of the break in farm prices during February. Prices during the second quarter moved forward again PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS PRECENTAGE INCREASES SINCE JUNE AND SINCE JUNE ALL COMMODITIES FOODS OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS FARM PRODUCTS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR CHART WHOLESALE PRICES ( COMMODITIES OTHER THAN FARM AND FOODS * ) Price advances during the first half of were marked for basic metals fuel and building materials. Hides and leather products showed a substantial drop PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE I I I I CHEMICALS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS FUEL AND ' LIGHTING MATERIAL I I I I I I I I I M I I I I I I I I I I I I I I J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M * BUILDING MATERIAL S_ ^ * HIDES AND LEATHER PRODUCTS i wm ^ TEXTILE PRODUCTS METALS AN METAL ~ PR0DU ITS I I 1I II I 1M1 * * H0USEFURNISHIN6 GOODS AND MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS NOT SHOWN SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR leather products. This resulted from the better supply position and the reduction in market demand for shoes Consumers ' prices advanced somewhat more than wholesale prices during the half year. ( See chart and appendix C table ) There was a temporary dip in food prices which reflected the February break in the prices of farm products. Thereafter food prices rebounded and still continued upward reaching new peaks. The growing effects of the decline in the supply of meat were reflected in a substantial rise in meat prices Even during the dip in food prices other consumer goods continued to advance as the increases in wholesale prices in the last quarter of were passed through to the retail level. Rents which rose some percent with partial decontrol in the fall of showed a slight continuous advance this year A significant aspect of advancing consumer prices lies in their effect upon wage demands while wage increases in turn are reflected in industrial prices The course of prices in has been highlighted by several spectaculai eveiits. First came the unusually sharp break in grain prices in early February following noticeable weakness in the last half of January. The decline affected cattle hog cotton and other farm prices as well as grain The readjustment of farm prices was of unusual severity. It raised fears in some quarters of a widespread break in prices production and employment similar to the collapse In this instance however the break was isolated and did not have the feared effect upon industry and commerce. The existence of agricultural price supports set a limit to the possible extent of the fall and gave reassurance that there would be no agricultural collapse. Grain prices remained above the support levels for the crop but wheat prices fell to about the level of the prospective supports for the crop. Furthermore owing to the nature of the agricultural industry the break in farm prices did not lead to curtailment of production or discharge of workers. A high level of investment in plant and equipment was being maintained construction activity was expanding and there was a large export movement and a high level of consumption. All these factors continued to enable the economy to localize weakness in one sector and even in that sector prices soon resumed their rise Nevertheless the recession in grain prices acted as a warning signal to business generally that price movements are no one-way street. Insofar as it damped down the spirit of inflation its effect was salutary. Hope was generated in some quarters that prices were about to level off and that necessary price adjustments could be made in an orderly fashion in response to an improving demand-and-supply situation. There was belief too that CONSUMERS ' PRICES After some hesitation in the first quarter of consumers1 prices resumed their upward climb with food prices in the lead PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE FOOD ITEMS * RENT ) I I I I I I I I I I I PRECENTAGE INCREASES SINCE JUNE AND SINCE JUNE ALL ITEMS * FOOD APPAREL RENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR * ALSO INCLUDES HOUSEFURNISHINGS FUEL ELECTRICITY ICE AND MISCELLANEOUS GOODS AND SERVICES NOT SHOWN ON CHART such developments on the price front would have a restraining influence on the forthcoming wage negotiations in major industries A second major price development which took place in the first quarter of the year was the gradual advance in numerous steel prices culminating in the mark-up of semifinished steel on February This rise gave notice that whatever the readjustments in the farm area demand pressures were still very strong in the area of basic industrial materials and that the boom in capital goods was continuing unabated Late in April it is true the leading company in the steel industry announced a series of price cuts and joined with other large employers in stating that the continuation of the price-wage spiral was harmful both to management and to labor. But this attempt to hold the price and wage line was short-lived. It was soon followed by both price and wage increases in many industries. Automobiles aluminum rubber products and electrical equipment and appliances and finally coal and steel were prominent examples. Recently announced price increases for steel average more than $ per ton or about percent The price situation at midyear was thus dominated by the emergence of a new impetus to the wage-price spiral. The substantial increase of coal and steel prices in conjunction with recent and prospective increases in transportation and public utility rates represents a broad upward movement in the cost structure of industry at large and forms the potential basis for a dangerous general spiraling of prices THE COURSE OF WAGES Wage trends during the half year have corresponded fairly closely to the course of the economy as a whole. As the year opened the inflationary tide of the second half of was running very strong and this was reflected in wage settlements. When the break in commodity prices engendered a less inflationary sentiment there appeared for a time a strong resistance to wage increases revealing in part the feeling that they could not be passed on to the consumer through higher prices. When the pulse of inflation again quickened and the cost-of-living trend again became clear the resistance to wage increases abated and an upward spiral of prices and wages again developed. For the entire first half of the year this spiral has not been as extreme as in the second half of but its momentum increased rapidly during May and June By the beginning of this year most union workers had received at least two postwar wage increases and a sizable fraction had received three or more. Available information indicates that unorganized workers did not fare quite so well. The third round of increases was well under way last fall and the signing of new and significant wage agreements continued as the new year began. Increases were negotiated in woolen textiles westcoast lumber building construction part of the meat-packing industry and other fields. Arbitration awards gave increases to maritime workers on both coasts and to some ladies ' garment workers in New York. Interspersed with the third-round increases were many minor and some major secondround contracts These wage settlements like those of were dominated by the rising cost of living. Higher living costs had by early largely dissipated the monetary gains of the second round. Hence organized labor was seeking new advances to restore its purchasing power. The third round settlements averaged somewhat less than those of the second round and were more closely adjusted to particular situations following somewhat less of a " pattern " than in previous years When the price break in the commodity markets induced a widespread hope that inflation was losing its force and that the cost of living might be stabilized or reduced coupled with the belief that the economy might not stand further advances in industrial prices it seemed that the third round of wage increases might not extend to the major industrial concerns whose contracts were to be negotiated in the spring. The major electrical companies sought to hold wages and to lower prices. Negotiations in that industry had been practically deadlocked for weeks when in April the United States Steel Corporation refused the demand of the steel workers for a substantial increase and made moderate reductions in prices of finished steel products. Following this action major negotiations in other branches of industry were suspended and several major companies in the automobile industry appeared to be standing firm in their opposition to wage demands After the commodity price break had been arrested without spreading to other segments of the economy and after the defense program was announced it appeared to workers that costs of living would not decline and might advance and to employers that the passing on of wage increases in higher prices would be possible. Since profit prospects were good and the denial of wage increases carried the threat of suspended operations there were by May widespread settlements at higher wages even in the metalr working field. The General Motors settlements of May cast the die in favor of wage advances in the mass-production industries. In relatively short order settlements were then reached in most of the automobile electrical aluminum rubber coal and steel industries Automobile contracts generally provided for around cents increase in hourly wages rubber cents and steel an average of cents. In the major electrical companies except for General Motors where the automobile contract applied to the electrical workers the wage increase was percent and in aluminum an average of percent. By June the average weekly earnings for manufacturing as a whole were nearly $ ( See appendix C tables and ) The terms of the General Motors settlement were noteworthy since they embodied the principle of adjustment up or down at short intervals in response to changes in cost of living and also provided for a future rise in dollar income to reflect technological progress. This formula has been adopted in very few subsequent contracts On March the bituminous coal miners stopped work in a conflict over the welfare fund. This stoppage resulted in a loss of steel output by about V/2 million tons. Work was resumed on April but new strike threats arose in May when negotiations were opened for the new year 's contract. This was settled on June by the granting of a $ a day wage increase and doubling the welfare fund royalty from cents to cents per ton. On July the anthracite companies accepted a similar contract The steel companies also reached an agreement covering their captive mines on July As a result of the new contract bituminous coal miners ' average weekly earnings will rise to approximately $ assuming a continuation of a full 40-hour workweek Earnings in the building construction industry have risen only somewhat less steeply than in coal mining in recent years. Wage rates for construction workers have been adjusted upward periodically since VJ-day. Skilled construction mechanics in metropolitan areas today average nearly $ an hour. Bricklayers are at the peak with an hourly wage running from $ to $ an hour. Weekly earnings for all construction workers average slightly more than $ a week. ( See appendix C table ) This figure reflects the short average workweek in construction and the low earnings of many unskilled and semiskilled workmen particularly in nonmetropolitan areas The fact that many wages have advanced sharply should not overshadow the fact that millions of workers who have not participated in the regular rounds of postwar increases have seen their real earnings decrease as the cost of living has mounted. Such unevenness of wage movements has a disturbing effect upon the whole wage structure upon relationships among the various cost factors in production and upon interindustry relationships as well Most third round increases have been roughly comparable percentagewise to the increase in the Consumers ' Price Index since the previous contract. With few exceptions bargaining has been concentrated this year on wage changes rather than on pension and other security benefits The limited fringe benefits have consisted largely of additional paid holidays and medical or hospitalization plans. Also a significant number of contracts have been signed for a 2-year period thus improving the prospect for industrial peace Despite the substantial wage rate increases in particular industries neither average weekly earnings nor total wage and salary incomes have risen significantly. This was partly because of the delay in settlements in the February-May period and partly because the effects of recent contract adjustments have not yet been reflected in the statistics. It was also partly because many workers have not had their wages raised and partly because the hours worked per week have been somewhat reduced. The workweek in manufacturing industries which averaged hours in the last half of fell to an average of about in the first half of this year. Similar decreases occurred in construction telephones electric power trade and service industries. On balance weekly earnings have been relatively stable throughout the early months of with increases in hourly earnings about offsetting reduction in hours THE IMPACT OF THREE GOVERNMENT ACTIONS While these price and wage developments were going on three important new factors were introduced into the price picture. The seriousness of the European situation led to an expanded defense program. The Congress approved an increase of approximately billion dollars above the January budget recommendations of billion dollars in support of national defense At about the same time the Congress authorized a new foreign aid program and set up an Economic Cooperation Administration to carry the program into effect. On April Federal taxes were reduced in an estimated amount of billion dollars a year. The impact of these three actions will be analyzed before evaluating the whole prospect for inflation Foreign aid and domestic supply Under the Foreign Assistance Act and other aid programs the Congress has over the past months provided funds for foreign aid in an aggregate amount of over billion dollars. Over billion is intended for aid to Europe primarily through the European recovery program. These funds are for use not later than the middle of The Economic Cooperation Administration was established by the Congress to administer the major new foreign aid programs. The ECA is insisting that the programs of the individual participating countries be screened by their joint organization before being submitted so that the ECA will receive a unified program for all of western Europe. This procedure should serve to encourage a high degree of cooperation among the participating countries Programs for the third quarter of allotting over billion dollars of EGA funds were recently announced. Programs for later periods have not yet been finally determined. Procurement of commodities and services including freight amounting to over million dollars had been authorized by the EC A up to July percent of this being for China and the rest for European countries. In accordance with the Government 's policy of maximizing the use of private channels of trade three-quarters of these authorizations were for procurement directly from private industry and only one-quarter representing chiefly agricultural commodities was for procurement through United States Government agencies. About half of the total consisted of authorizations to procure goods outside the United States primarily in Canada but including also the participating countries Such " offshore procurement " constitutes the bulk of the authorizations in the cases of such commodities in tight supply in the United States as petroleum nonferrous metals meats inedible oils and fats fertilizer and lumber and newsprint The foreign aid program is not designed to put props under our current business boom. The unfilled demands of the American market with its enormous purchasing power would sustain our prosperity for the present even if foreign markets were sharply reduced. We are deliberately subjecting ourselves to inflationary pressures on the domestic economy in the short-run in order to contribute to international security and economic stabilization in the long-run Stabilizing the world political situation and restoring peaceful world trade is vital to maintaining our domestic economy on a high level of production and employment in the years to come. After accumulated demands at home have been successfully met and supply lines filled up the American economy to continue to operate at high speed requires that the world in which we trade shall likewise be active and prosperous. Further recovery in western Europe will progressively remove the need for further assistance from the United States Government. Moreover if we pursue proper policies in international trade it will promote a beneficial flow of goods to the United States and support foreign demand for our products These deferred advantages however do not eliminate nor even reduce the present problem resulting from stimulated exports of goods while our own markets are still not fully supplied. It is true that the total export surplus in the coming months will probably not attain the average rate of even if our aid is utilized at a higher rate than last year. The reason is that foreign countries will not be able to liquidate gold and dollar assets in anything like the amounts they did in because these resources have been greatly reduced ; and the funds made available through private sources through the International Bank and through the International Monetary Fund are not likely to make up the difference. The excess of exports over imports may however be expected to rise from the level reached during the first half of this year when operations under the Economic Cooperation Act had hardly begun Even more significant than the total is the composition of the bill of goods required. Earlier reports on the impact of foreign aid upon the domestic economy have emphasized that the pressure upon a few key spots is more troublesome than the impact would appear to be when measured in aggregate dollar terms. This will continue to be the case with an important difference between the impact upon agricultural supplies and the impact upon industrial supplies In the case of agricultural supplies exports of wheat from this country are now expected to be below the million bushels exported during the past crop year. This reflects the prospects of unusually good cereal crops in western Europe this year compared with an extremely low yield last year. This easing of foreign pressure on our grain supplies comes at a time when our own wheat crop is estimated at a high figure of billion bushels ( million below last year 's record crop ) Meanwhile the preliminary outlook for corn offers hope of a record crop of billion bushels compared with last year 's billion. In addition most of the agricultural commodities which are expected to be shipped abroad in larger quantities this year than in such as cotton tobacco and some other products are available at home in adequate supply. Thus the impact of the aid program in the agricultural area with its important bearing upon domestic food prices is unlikely to be as serious as it has been. Nonetheless it will have a substantial continuing effect in view of the extraordinarily high domestic demand In the case of some key industrial products the foreign aid program will continue to exert great pressure against tight supply. Although major decreases are expected in the total export of fats and oils freight cars electrical machinery and apparatus petroleum products and coal the high domestic demand for these products in relation to supply will require the most careful screening of exports The rate of steel exports during the remainder of this year while lower than in is expected to be higher than in the first part of this year because exports to western Europe are expected to increase more than exports to the rest of the world will be reduced even with drastic controls Agricultural machinery in great demand at home is not expected to be exported at higher rates in the second half of this year than in the first half although it will be exported at a higher rate than in While increased production will make somewhat larger amounts of such important commodities as steel agricultural machinery and fertilizer available for domestic use it may be said in summary that the foreign aid program as a whole will exert a somewhat greater pressure upon the domestic economy in the second half of this year than in the first half although somewhat less than during Defense demands and civilian supply The original recommendations last January in the Budget Message called for only a slight expansion of our national defense program. The total authority to obligate funds for national defense during the fiscal year was billion dollars and the Budget Message requested a total authorization for the fiscal year of billion. This increase was accounted for mainly by the universal training program proposed at that time and by a larger stockpiling program Unhappily the course of events made it clear that a prudent regard for maintaining the peace called for expanded programs in all areas of national defense. Following recommendations for an enlarged program the Congress approved such expansion during the last session. For the fiscal year total appropriations and contract authorizations in the amount of about billion dollars have now been approved about billion dollars above the amount recommended last January. Included in this increased program is million dollars authorized for the stockpiling of strategic and critical materials. In addition to the defense program about million dollars have been authorized for related expansion for the merchant shipbuilding program and million not obligated last year has been extended. The largest increase in defense expenditures is accounted for by a very rapid stepping-up of the aircraft program. There will also be a substantial increase in the personnel of the Armed Forces and in procurement for the Army and the Navy These increased authorizations it is true in the main provide the basis for future expansion and will have relatively little effect on cash payments for defense programs during the last half of this year. During the first half of the calendar year cash payments in support of national defense were running at an annual rate of about billion dollars. With the new programs it is estimated that during the second half of this year the annual rate of payments will increase by about million dollars. ( See appendix A table ) Most of the additional cash payments will be made in subsequent years. Looking at the matter only for the short run it might be thought that such an increase in expenditures for defense does not have very significant consequences in an economy where the gross national prod- uct is running at almost a billion dollar level. There are however two reasons why the impact on the national economy will be substantial The first reason is that the commitments involved in this stepping-up of the military establishment represent a rising trend. This does not mean that new defense proposals will be made ; whether or not that will be necessary no one can now say. It means simply that the program now under way will involve an increasing rate of outlays over the next years. The planning and contracting for these rising expenditures will have economic impacts in advance of actual expenditures. They support anticipations of high business volume and high consumer incomes. They equally support anticipations of pressures upon the labor supply and shortages of raw materials and key industrial products. Some of these effects are already beginning to appear The second reason for the substantial impact of the defense program upon the domestic economy is that there is now little slack in the use of our productive capacity. Particular industries of great importance to the defense program are already severely overburdened and particular materials are in short supply On the side of materials the program for the stockpiling of strategic and critical materials will give rise to important impacts. To carry out this program the Congress has to date provided funds and contract authorizations totaling million dollars. Of this amount million dollars were in appropriations and million in contract authorizations The big impact of stockpile procurement is yet to come ; a major fraction of the funds available will not be spent until later years. Purchases thus far have been limited since the needed materials have been in short supply even for current industrial use. Actual payments for deliveries from new procurement through June were less than million dollars While there is no absolute certainty about the rate of stockpiling procurement in the future the funds available are sufficient if rapidly spent to have a sharp impact in the basic materials markets. The rate at which the balance of about million dollars already authorized will be spent during the next months is still to be determined but it will be stepped up considerably The direct requirements of the military maritime atomic energy and foreign aid programs in the next months will absorb significant percentages of the prospective supply of such materials as copper zinc and lead. Attainment of the stockpile goals deemed necessary to our national security would require setting aside additional amounts annually for several years. As it will not be possible to increase supplies of these materials substantially in the near future the removal of considerable amounts of them from the market for stockpiling purposes would encroach upon the level of industrial production at many points. One serious consequence would be a substantial and possibly in some instances drastic rise in prices. Another would be the impairment of current civilian production To hold the economic impact to the minimum consistent with satisfactory stockpiling progress it will be necessary to keep the procurement program flexible to give careful attention to its impact on other essential programs and to stimulate new production The shortages which the national defense program will in due course accentuate are not limited to materials marked for stockpiling. Aluminum is a case in point. In view of the increased requirements for aircraft military requirements for aluminum in the fiscal year amount to more than percent of the supply. Further expansion of aluminum production draws heavily on the electric-power supply in regions where it is already short. Although electric-power capacity was greatly expanded during the war the peacetime load of a civilian population with steady work and good incomes promptly took up the whole electric capacity and as a result an expansion program running several years ahead was launched The electric-power shortage can not easily be relieved by turning to fuel oil and natural gas because of shortage of pipe and drilling equipment ; nor by turning to coal because of shortage of cars and generators Steel is another case in point. The principal voluntary allotments already made or under consideration under Public Law ( military atomic energy housing freight cars barges and oil and gas industry equipment ) together with EC A and maritime program requirements would absorb in this fiscal year nearly a quarter of the total supply of steel mill products and more than half the supply of some specific products such as plates and pipes and tubing For steel and most of the other strategic materials the task in hand is not simply to assure adequate supplies for the defense program and a few others of top priority. Expanded allocations to specific programs if effectively accomplished reduce the remaining supply available for all other needs. Most consumers of steel outside the present and contemplated voluntary allocation categories will have less steel in the next months than they had during the past months. Consumers who have been able to acquire their own steelmaking facilities will be in a preferred position. Many of the uses of strategic materials not included in the preferred programs are essential directly for the maintenance of civilian output and indirectly for meeting our military and foreign aid commitments These needs can not be indiscriminately reduced. Nor can the fulfillment of these needs without great damage be left to a scramble for supplies by unlimited bidding-up of prices or handled on the basis of historical trade quotas bearing little relation to essentiality The instruments now available for the domestic allocation of commodities in short supply do not afford adequate safety in the face of present and prospective pressures. There are for example provisions for the domestic allocation of antimony tin and tin products and mandatory power under the Selective Service Act to allocate steel for military requirements and to assign priorities for materials and products procured for the military and atomic energy programs. These mandatory powers however apply to only a small portion of the demand for the materials which they cover Thus generally under the legislation now in force only voluntary allocation procedures are available to distribute the supply of scarce commodities This results in two grave difficulties. The first of these difficulties is that rapid progress toward our stockpiling goals would require curtailment of domestic civilian consumption to a greater extent than voluntary programs can accomplish. If either stockpiling or other procurement programs should be substantially accelerated there is serious doubt of the ultimate adequacy of existing measures to meet the problems of inflation disorganization of production and harm to small business which would arise from aggravated specific commodity shortages. The second difficulty is that with the weak tools now available the orderly handling of essential stockpiling and procurement programs may be jeopardized in an effort to avoid disruption of the general economy One further impact of the expanded defense program derives from its manpower requirements. These will not be very great in but it is estimated that new defense needs will within a year from now call for the services of about million persons as additions to the armed forces civilian employees of the armed forces and workers for producing military equipment. These manpower requirements of the defense program can only in part be drawn from new accessions to the labor force. There will arise numerous labor shortages in some areas of the country. Some plants undergoing a marked expansion will experience manpower shortages particularly of key skilled and professional personnel such as tool and die makers instrument makers physicists chemists and aeronautical engineers. This will cause disturbances in some spheres of civilian production and upward pressures on wages and other costs The impact of tax reduction As shown in the discussion of government transactions on page the consolidated cash surplus of Federal payments over receipts during the fiscal year amounted to billion dollars of which billion came in the first half of the calendar year Under reduced taxes it now appears that in the second half of the calendar year there will be only a small surplus if any although a sharp rise in prices and incomes under the pressure of inflation might operate to increase Treasury receipts materially The drastic reduction in the surplus from the level prevailing during the first half of the calendar year is not due solely to tax reduction but is due in part to increased expenditures especially those resulting from the enlarged defense program. The decline in the surplus attributable to the adoption by the Congress of the Tax Revenue Act of would amount over a full year 's operation at present income levels to about billion dollars This tax reduction will strengthen consumer expenditures. Taxpayers with net incomes of $ or less will receive a total tax reduction of about billion dollars ; a total of billion dollars of tax reduction will accrue to those in the higher-income brackets. In the light of these figures it seems reasonable to estimate that the tax reduction bill will result in an increase in the annual rate of consumer spending of somewhere between and billion dollars The tax reduction occurred at a time when the international situation impelled us to adopt additional programs for national defense and foreign aid. It sharply reduces the large surplus at a time when inflationary forces are still present and thereby removes our principal protection against the strengthening of these forces III. The Issue Between Inflation and Stabilization N the preceding pages the problem of inflation has stood at the center of the picture. The upsurge of various elements in the price and income structure has introduced unsettling factors which are clearly incompatible with stable prosperity and increasing national security. At the very heart of sound economic policies must be the desire to help achieve greater stability and more permanently workable relationships as rapidly as possible From time to time since the war there have been brief periods when we appeared to be moving toward such stabilizing relationships. But each time this prospect was soon upset by some new factor of curtailed supply or expanded market demand which unleashed again the unsettling forces of inflation. Effective adjustment policies have been hard to devise and harder to get accepted and applied We appear now to be once more at a stage of renewed instability with many prices reaching for the easy dollars that a still undersupplied market is ready to yield ; with recent and prospective wage settlements contributing to the upward process ; with market demand again being stimulated by the accelerating procurement programs of foreign aid and national defense ; and with continuing scarcities of numerous key materials. Tax reduction has added to consumer and business demand in the market but it is incapable of stimulating a proportionately larger flow of goods from our already overloaded plants fully employed labor force and still overstrained supply lines The presence of these inflationary factors does not mean that we are on the threshold of an inflationary orgy of the " run-away " kind. While alarmists refer to our present currency as " printing press money " sober students do not see in the present monetary situation any real analogy with Continental and Confederate currency episodes or the more recent collapse of the currencies of numerous countries in Europe or elsewhere after both World Wars Of course the United States dollar has had its real value lowered in the course of the economic readjustments induced by World War II. And I there is no likelihood of a near-time restoration of that former value. But there is nothing sacred about the price marks of or and the attempt to restore them would probably create more hardship than it would alleviate To be sure we want to achieve reasonable steadiness of the dollar although at a price level necessarily higher than in prewar times. But the process of monetary adjustment is only one ingredient and in a sense only a byproduct of adjusting relationships within the price-income structure so as to facilitate and maintain maximum production and employment. The practical question now is how these adjustments may be wrought primarily in the context of the bargaining and compromising through which the parties at interest work out their rival claims in a free economy but subject to the guiding influences of appropriate public policies In this process as it is now unfolding there are complex forces somej working to lessen and others to intensify inflationary pressures. In attempting to judge what balance these competing forces may work out we begin by examining some of the factors that reduce the pressure of inflation Outstanding among these is the fact that in many fields of production the supply situation is greatly improved One such development was dramatized by the Department of Agriculture crop report of July It opened with these profoundly significant sentences : Crop production in promises to surpass that of the outstanding year of and the record set in * * * a record [ corn ] production of million bushels is now indicated. The wheat prospect million bushels is an improvement of percent over earlier forecasts and will be the second largest crop in our history. * * * Cotton acreage is percent larger than in * * * All-crop prospects are reported above the average of the past ten years and as good as in Current estimates indicate an aggregate production about percent of the average compared with percent in and percent in Despite our high degree of industrialization the tremendous importance of agriculture can not be overlooked. The world shortage of foods and other products of agricultural origin continuing up to this year has had an immense inflationary impact upon the whole price structure through the relations that farm prices have to the cost of living and to industrial wages prices and profits. Although the full effects will not be felt for some time greater abundance in basic agricultural crops should be of signal aid in the checking of inflation and the progressive working out of reasonably stable relationships That end would not be promoted if the enlargement in supply of farm products were to coincide with some serious curtailment of demand to produce a collapse of farmers5 incomes. Such a collapse shortly after World War I spread to rural merchants and bankers to manufacturers of farm equipment and consumer goods and to other commodity markets But the repetition of such a debacle today is precluded by a policy of farm income supports implemented by procedures worked out and tested over the past twenty years though not yet perfected A second factor which should significantly work against further inflation is the increase in industrial expansion. We appear to be nearing the end of the strong impact of war-created shortages of plant and inventory. While industrial output has increased less rapidly than extremely favorable production conditions had led us to expect it should progressively show the effect of nearly years of added capital investment upon a vast scale. As an enlarged and modernized industrial plant gets shaken down and its crews trained to maximum efficiency domestic backlogs of orders will be worked down and the increased flow of final products will permit the great demands upon the productive system to be met more easily and will ease the pressure on prices These favorable factors on the physical side are'reinforced by numerous indications of improved economic understanding and broader objectives on the part of those who operate our business system. It can not fairly be said that they have rushed blindly ahead in the boom spirit of past expansionary periods. A sense of caution has been attained by industrialists merchants and bankers with regard to inventories credit expansion and construction plans. Some unions have applied moderation to their wage demands and some manufacturers and distributors have sought to hold prices against further advances or have initiated reductions as a means of doing something positive to stem inflation If international tension lessens the lightening of both the physical and psychological impact on our economy with its great productive potential would sharply reduce inflationary pressure at important points. We might then rather promptly be put to the test to show whether our producers and distributors could make price and cost adjustments fast enough to continue employment and production without serious cutbacks In spite of the counterinflationary factors enumerated it remains true that inflation is still very much with us. The nature of this continued inflation has been treated in detail in the preceding sections of this report It can be summarized briefly as three interrelated phases of one complex process First there is the fact that demand in most categories has been expanding and may expand further. Consumer demand is running high particularly under the impact of tax reduction and wage increases. Rising residential construction and heavy investment fed by high profits add to businesss demand. Government expenditures are rising. Thus the sum total of effective demand of all types still continues to press against a supply that increases only slowly. This excess of demand may not be as general as it was when postwar shortages were at their peak. The inflationary pressure is perhaps more selective than it was but it is still a major factor in the price situation Second the inflationary effects have been multiplied through the pricewage spiral. Developments of the last few months have had a cumulative effect of great importance at the very base of our industrial structure. The recent attempt to hold industrial wages and reduce prices of industrial goods has evaporated. Substantial wage increases which often have been made in order to catch up with previous price increases have been accompanied in turn or promptly followed by substantial rises in the prices in industrial goods. Production costs are still rising and while many businesses can pass them along in higher prices there are others that are obviously squeezed Capacity to pay for high-priced materials is not necessarily distributing them in the way most consonant with economic efficiency. Railroad freight and passenger rates have been materially increased and utilities in many instances have been granted advances by public utility commissions while others have requests for such advances pending. This upward movement of prices is linked on the one side to the third round of wage increases and linked on the other to active talk of a fourth round The rising cost of living is imposing intense hardship upon millions of individuals who are not strategically located to participate in the upward movement. Meat prices continue to rise while the prospectively large supply of grain will have little power to enlarge the supply of meat throughout the remainder of this year and indeed may operate somewhat to reduce it. While improved grain stocks next year will have important effects on the prices of livestock products they can not in the immediate future counteract the strong inflationary forces which control our markets Third credit expansion partly a cause and partly a result of inflation still persists. The spiraling increase in prices and wages can continue only so long as business can replenish its working capital from bank credit or through the conversion of liquid assets Almost as significant in its disturbing effect as the statistically demonstrable evidences of inflation is the persistent uneasiness which it breeds an uneasiness which could expand into a profoundly disruptive force if it is not removed by dealing with the specific factors which are its causes. The deep significance and reality of this uneasiness in the presence of inflation was clearly illustrated by the conditions surrounding the break in commodity prices early in A tremor of uncertainty even of fear ran through the whole economy and for a short time there were many who thought that we were close to a serious and general downturn in employment and production Fortunately that particular break turned out to be corrective rather than disastrous. But this should not blind us to the fact that there were special circumstances already referred to which isolated its significance and which could not be counted upon to protect us under other circumstances Besides the farm price-support program which gave assurance to the business community at large the break was shortly followed by other events in the economy which fortified optimistic business sentiment But we can not ignore the prospect that unworkable relationships in the price structure necessarily the outgrowth of unconquered inflation may lead to a break in some other sector of the economy where the consequences would not thus be isolated. If attendant developments which can not be foreseen did not serve substantially to counteract it this break well might carry our highly sensitive economy into a general recession of serious proportions In short we have this very year had a significant warning while there has still been opportunity to act in time. Far from being satisfied because the lack of action thus far taken has not yet reaped the ultimate consequences of inflation we should profit by this warning and vigorously seize the additional grant of time that circumstances have accorded to us The most dangerous error that could overtake us as a nation would be to assume that the problem has disappeared or that our efforts should be abated because we have thus far avoided serious reverses or because the basic conditions for continued prosperity appear to be sound. It is typical for inflationary and speculative booms to collapse while business sentiment is still confident It is not enough to be satisfied with quick and crude adjustments by which our economy can " get by " from month to month or year to year still under the momentum of forces engendered during the 4-year war period. No one can foretell precisely when some event or series of events might touch off a change in the economic situation more rapidly than we were prepared to deal with it. It is of ever-increasing importance that the policies and actions of private business labor agriculture and Government should move toward economically sound relationships so that the postwar boom may be succeeded by a sustained prosperity based on the maximum reasonable use of our productive resources In the Employment Act of the Congress declared the continuing policy of the Government to " coordinate and utilize all its plans functions and resources " to bring about and maintain maximum production and employment and to preserve and strengthen our economy of free competitive enterprise. This plan of action requires that we shall always look to the independent factors in our business world to adjust their policies so intelligently that the imbalances which are inevitable in our highly dynamic economy shall be temporary and shall not accumulate until they destroy business stability The role of the Government as contemplated in the Employment Act ordinarily is to develop its own activities and organize the policies which affect business in such a way as to facilitate these needed voluntary adjustments. But if economic maladjustments become so serious that the voluntary action is clearly inadequate to halt threatening trends in the economy the power of Government must be used where the President and the Congress deem necessary to forestall serious damage to the public interest The comprehensive wartime controls over business were rapidly removed after the close of hostilities. Voluntary action has been increasingly relied upon to maintain business activity at a high level without permitting serious maladjustments to arise. The files of our business journals show that wide attention has been given to the desirability as well as the need for every business firm to adjust its own policies so that it may contribute its share to stabilization. The attitude and effort of thousands of less conspicuous firms deserve to be recognized along with the better publicized actions of a few of our most important business corporations which have held down or actually reduced prices in a boom market for the express purpose of furnishing leadership in an effort to halt the inflationary movement The same attitude has been exhibited by a large number of the most important leaders of organized labor who have earnestly and with some success postponed or moderated the urgent demands of members of their labor unions for wage increases to meet the rising cost of living. Farmers have frankly expressed their uneasiness about the situation which was being created by rising prices even though they have been beneficiaries thereof but the nature of this industry gives them little opportunity to take positive measures. Consumers have reserved large amounts of their savings bonds and despite the pressure of high prices have made large annual additions to current savings While this spreading sense of responsibility and of caution promises much for the success of our economy in meeting problems of adjustment in the future the forces with which we now contend have proved to be too strong for the countervailing efforts of individual factors in the business world. The workers have seen the cost of living continue to mount and to them it seems that any restraint they have shown has only brought them sacrifice without corresponding benefits to the public. The business firms which have held down their prices can only feel that they have permitted others to increase their profits and they have not halted the inflation A real difficulty with the wholly voluntary solution is that it requires simultaneous action by workers businessmen and consumers. But no individual or group can have firm assurance that the inflation will be stopped. It is therefore necessary that the Government should have and use powers in the interest of economic stability to supplement the strength of individual actions to give them common direction and to prevent their dissipation through mutual conflict of purpose. Only with the support of wise and vigorous Government action can the effectiveness of voluntary actions be assured Appendix A The Nation 's Economic Budget Tables Page The Nation 's Economic Budget Consumer account Business account The export surplus and net foreign investment Government cash receipts and payments to the public Reconciliation of Budget receipts with cash receipts from the public fiscal year Reconciliation of Budget expenditures with cash payments to the public fiscal year Federal cash surplus and Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing and Federal cash payments by function and Federal cash payments by type of recipient and Reconciliation of cash payments to the public with Government expenditures for goods and services Adjustments to receipts ( or income ) in the Nation 's Economic Budget Reconciliation of cash receipts with tax series arising from current production of goods and services The Nation 's Economic Budget Explanation of the tables Table presents the Nation 's Economic Budget for the calendar year and the first half of TABLE The Nation 's Economic Budget Calendar year and January-June [ Billions of dollars current prices ] January-June annual rates seasonally adjusted i Economic group Excess Expendi- Excess Receipts Expendi- ( ) or ( ) or tures deficit ( ) Receipts tures deficit ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable income _ Expenditures Saving ( ) ___ _ BUSINESS Undistributed profits and additions to reserves Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment INTERNATIONAL Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment GOVERNMENT ( Federal State and local ) Cash receipts from the public Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments A D J U S T M E N T S ( To arrive at gross national product ) For receipts For payments Statistical discrepancy Total gross national product O A i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Nature of the accounts and sources The Nation 's Economic Budget is designed to give a general picture of significant movements or changes in the economy and their relation to the economic decisions of consumers business and government. The principal flows of income and expenditures and the net additions to and absorption of saving are interrelated in an overall way in the Budget The estimates of consumer receipts and expenditure business receipts and domestic investment and net foreign investment are based on the income and product accounts prepared by the Department of Commerce.1 Government receipts and payments are based on cash receipts from and payments to the public as estimated by the Bureau of the Budget.2 The cash receipts and payments series is used because it gives a more complete picture of the immediate economic impact of Government operations than other available series on Government expenditures The adjustments to receipts and expenditures are made to reconcile the total of the accounts with the gross national product or expenditure The latter includes only receipts or expenditures arising from the current production of goods and services while the accounts of consumers business and government include certain other types of transactions. The nature of these adjustments is discussed more fully in the section " Adjustments to receipts and expenditures. " A brief description of the accounts with explanatory and supplementary tables follows Consumer account Table below shows the principal sources of personal income personal taxes and a breakdown of expenditures by important classifications. Consumer income includes the net profits of unincorporated business Personal saving is a residual derived by deducting expenditures from disposable income. Because of statistical imperfections difficulties of adjusting for seasonality etc. too much significance should not be attached to small variations in this figure. Expenditures for dwellings are considered as a business investment rather than a consumer expenditure A number of the principal series comprised in the national income and product estimates are shown in appendix C tables through ( by calendar years from through and by quarters for and the first half of ) Those desiring more detailed information are referred to the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business published in July of and to the Survey of Current Business July See p. A121 of the Budget of the United States for fiscal year T A B L E Consumer account Calendar year and January-June [ Billions of dollars ] Eeceipts or expenditures Receipts : Personal income Salaries wages and other labor income 2_ Proprietors ' and rental income Dividends and personal interest Transfer payments Veterans < _ _ Other. Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable income Expenditures : Durable goods Nondurable goods Services _ January-June annual rates seasonally adjusted l __ __ Total. ! " ? ! Saving i Estimates based on incomplete data ' Includes employer disbursements for wages and salaries minus employee contributions for social insurance plus other labor income Includes business transfers < Includes military pensions disability and retirement payments mustering-out pay unemployment self-employment and subsistence allowances terminal-leave bonds and other miscellaneous payments NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Business account The business account is shown in table Business income includes undistributed corporate profits and the adjustment for corporate inventory valuation plus capital consumption allowances for both corporate and noncorporate business. Because there is no information on noncorporate entrepreneurial withdrawals it is impossible to include an estimate of retained earnings for unincorporated business in business income. On the other hand investment includes not only the investment of all business but also the investment of individuals in homes. Business income and expenditures are therefore not entirely comparable The investment items shown in the business account do not show completely the amount of funds required for financing. For example investment includes only that part of an increase in the value of inventory arising from an increase in physical volume while the whole amount of the increase in the book value of inventories must be financed. Needs for capital also arise in connection with the transfer of fixed assets though such transfers are not reflected in the gross national product and in connection with an expansion of accounts receivable. On the other hand some investment in equipment is financed through depreciation allowances and some is charged to current expense. Agricultural equipment is frequently financed out of farmers ' current income and residential construction by the owner-occupant. Thus these investments do not give rise to financing requirements in the usual sense even though they do absorb saving For the corporations alone financing sources and requirements are shown in table appendix G TABLE Business account Calendar year and January-June [ Billions of dollars ] January-June annual Receipts or investment Receipts : Corporate profits _. Less : Corporate profits tax liabilities _ Dividends. _ Equals : Corporate undivided profits Plus : Capital consumption allowance .__ Less : Corporate inventory valuation adjustmenta Equals : Undistributed profits ( excluding inventory valuation adjustment ) and additions to reserves Domestic gross investment : Construction __ _ ._ _ Residential nonfarm Nonresidential _ _ Producers ' durable equipment Change in business inventories Total investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data The estimate of corporate profits for the second quarter of is that of the Council of Economic Advisers This adjustment is required because corporate income is reckoned inclusive of changes in the book value of inventories as is customary in business accounting whereas only the value of the real change in inventories is counted as current output in the national product NOTE Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding International account Net foreign investment as included in the Nation 's Economic Budget does not reflect the entire export surplus shown in table page of the text. It consists only of the portion financed by means that add to this country 's net claims abroad during the period under consideration Gifts grants and other unilateral transfers therefore are not included Government unilateral transfers whether in cash or in kind are included in the Nation 's Economic Budget as a Government payment ; private unilateral transfers are included in consumer expenditures In and these two types of unilateral transfers had a net value of nearly and billion dollars respectively. In however this total and consequently the difference between the total export surplus and net foreign investment is expected to become considerably greater owing to the large proportion of Government aid to foreign countries that will take the form of grants rather than loans. As a result net foreign invest- merit is expected to remain much lower than in and the major portion of the total export surplus will be included in the Government component of the Nation 's Economic Budget The composition of the total excess of exports of goods and services and the means of financing it are shown in appendix C table The derivation of net foreign investment from this total is shown in table below TABLE The export surplus and net foreign investment Calendar year and January-June [ Billions of dollars ] Item January-June annual rates l Surplus of exports of goods and services. Less : Net unilateral transfers : Government Private Equals : Net foreign investment i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Government account Table provides a breakdown of the cash receipts and payments of Federal and State and local governments which are combined in the Nation 's Economic Budget. Tables through are supplementary tables on the Federal budget. The first two of these show the derivation of cash receipts and payments from budgetary receipts and expenditures. Table shows the Federal cash surplus and tables and provide additional analytical material on cash receipts and payments including estimates for the second half of calendar year a. Derivation of Cash Receipts and Payments from Budgetary Receipts and Expenditures. The basic sources of information concerning Federal Government receipts and disbursements are Government Budget and Trust accounts. Such accounts present the financial position and operations of the Government in accordance with conventional governmental accounting techniques From the standpoint of depicting the current flow of funds to and from the Government however and hence the immediate economic impact of Government operations Federal receipts and expenditures as stated in conventional Budget and Trust accounts are deficient. In the first place as is desirable for purposes of long-range financial control they show receipts and expenditures in many fields on an accrual rather than on a current cash basis. Terminal-leave bonds issued to veterans for example are recorded as a budgetary expenditure at the time of issue rather than at the time they are redeemed although it is probably not until the latter moment that their direct economic impact is felt. Secondly conventional Budget and Trust account data contain in the aggregate a considerable amount of double counting when considered from the standpoint of the Government as a whole. For example transfers from the Treasury general fund to trust accounts are in order to present a complete picture of Federal financial operations recorded both as expenditures and receipts From the standpoint of the Government as a whole however the transaction is purely one of intragovernmental accounting Government cash receipts and payments to the public TABLE Calendar year and January-June [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts or payments Receipts : Federal State and local * _ _ Total receipts Payments : Federal. State and local _ _ _ Total payments Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) : Federal _ State and local Total JanuaryJune annual rates seasonally adjusted i _ _ i Estimate based on incomplete data * Excludes Federal grants-in-aid NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding In order to derive the Government Account in the Nation 's Economic Budget therefore it is necessary ( i ) to place the conventional data on a current cash basis and ( ii ) to eliminate double counting. Tables and on page of the text show the cash transactions of Federal and of State and local governments on such a consolidated basis Tables and show a reconciliation of Federal Budget receipts and expenditures with cash receipts from and payments to the public. A detailed reconciliation of Federal Budget and cash transactions appears monthly in the Treasury Bulletin. A fuller explanation of the differences between budgetary and cash receipts and expenditures may be found in the Budget of the United States ( p. A121 ) TABLE Reconciliation of Budget receipts with cask receipts from the public Fiscal year [ Billions of dollars ] Fiscal Year Receipts Net budget receipts Trust account receipts _ ___ Total recorded receipts Less : Intragovernmental transactions : Payments to U. S. Treasury ( miscellaneous receipts ) by Government enterprises Transfers from general fund to trust accounts Interest received by trust funds on investments in United States securities Receipts from sale of surplus vessels transferred to U. S. Treasury ( miscellaneous receipts ) but also recorded as a trust account receipt and expenditure Other Less : Recorded receipts-not paid in cash by the public : Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement funds Other.. _ Equals : Cash receipts from the public * _ * Estimates based on incomplete data Less than million dollars Excludes borrowing NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE Reconciliation of Budget expenditures with cash payments to the public Fiscal year [ Billions of dollars ] Expenditure or payment Fiscal Year Budget expenditures _ _ Trust account expenditures i _ _ Total recorded expenditures __ _ Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Adjusted total recorded expenditures _ ___ Less : Intragovernmental transactions : Payments to U. S. Treasury ( miscellaneous receipts ) by Government enterprises Transfers from general fund to trust accounts Interest received by trust funds on investments in United States securities Investments of trust funds and Government enterprises in United States securities Receipts from sale of surplus vessels transferred to U. S. Treasury but also recorded as a trust account expenditure _ Other _ _ _.-_ Less : Recorded expenditures not paid out in cash : Deduction from employees ' salaries for retirement funds Interest on savings bonds ( net increase in redemption value of outstanding issues ) Terminal leave bonds issued _._ Plus : Cash payments not recorded as expenditures : Redemption of excess profits tax refund bonds and adjusted service certificates Terminal leave bonds redeemed for cash __ Redemption of non-interest-bearing notes by the International Bank and Monetary Fund. Expenditures of Government enterprises from proceeds of sales of obligations in the market Equals : Cash payments to the public ( * ) i Estimates based on incomplete data * Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding b. Supplementary Tables on Federal Cash Transactions. Table shows the Federal cash surplus for recent and current periods. The major sources of Federal revenues are shown in table Table analyzes Federal cash payments according to major governmental function. Table differs from table by classifying cash payments not according to function but according to the major groups initially receiving such payments so far as can be done on the basis of the available data. Civilian salaries and wages for example are grouped in a single category although in the functional table they are distributed among virtually all categories. Similarly " payments to business for purchases of goods and services " include a large volume of purchases financed by grants from the Federal Government in support of our foreign aid programs although these would fall under " international affairs and finance " in the functional classification T A B L E Federal cask surplus Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ! actual Receipts or payments annual rates seasonally adjusted JanuaryJune preliminary JulyDecember estimate Receipts.. Payments Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] actual Source Direct taxes on individuals * _ Direct taxes on corporations. Employment taxes * Excises and customs Miscellaneous receipts Receipts of trust accounts JanuaryJune preliminary JulyDecember estimate i Includes personal income taxes and estate and gift taxes * Excludes amounts transferred directly to trust accounts NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Total cash receipts. annual rates seasonally adjusted TABLE Federal cash payments by function Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] actual Payment annual'rates seasonally adjusted January-June July-December preliminary estimate Budget accounts : National defense International affairs and finance Veterans ' services and benefits _ _ __ _ Interest on the public debt Refunds of receipts Other _ Trust accounts Exchange Stabilization Fund _ Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Adjustment to daily Treasury statement basis i34 Total. i49 Total payments to the public Addendum ( included in above ) : Total payments relating to international affairs and finance : Budget accounts Foreign economic cooperation trust fund Exchange Stabilization F u n d ' Excludes payments of foreign economic trust fund see addendum Includes payments from foreign economic cooperation trust fund see addendum * Redemption of notes by International Monetary Fund of portion of United States subscription made rom Exchange Stabilization Fund NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE Federal cash payments by type of recipient Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] Payment annual rates seasonally adjusted January-June July-December preliminary estimate Individuals : Salaries and wages of Federal personnel : Military ( excluding terminal-leave pay to enlisted personnel ) Civilian Allowances to dependents of military personnel Readjustment benefits pensions and other payments to veterans Social insurance beneficiaries Loans to home owners Interest on the Federal debt -Refunds of taxes * Other * Total Business : Payments for purchases of goods and services Subsidies and other payments to farmers Loans and investments * Interest on the Federal debt Refunds of taxes ._ _ ._ Subsidy arising from postal deficit _ Home mortgage purchases from financial institutions War-damage insurance claims and participants ' profit Total International : Loans to foreign governments _ Subscriptions to the International Monetary F u n d and Bank Membership in other international organizations and unilateral cash transfers Total State and local governments and public agencies : G ran ts-in-aid Interest on the Federal debt Loans Total ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Total Federal cash payments to the public ( ) Civilian wages and salaries exclude payroll deductions for Federal employees ' retirement benefits and Post Office wages and salaries. Post Office wages and salaries are estimated at billion dollars in calendar year and at annual rates of billion and billion in the first and second halves of calendar year respectively. The total Federal civilian pay roll including the Post Office is estimated to be and billion dollars in the same periods Also includes cash terminal-leave pay to enlisted personnel cashing of terminal-leave bonds mustering-out pay and payment of Government and national service life insurance benefits to veterans ' beneficiaries * Repayments exceed loans * Refunds to individuals include refunds to unincorporated business * Consists of cash trust account payments other than payment of social insurance benefits and Government and national service life insurance. Such items as repayments of personal funds of military and civilian personnel located overseas which were deposited in trust accounts and payments of earnings to prisoners of war are included fl Includes payments of foreign economic cooperation trust fund for goods and services of billion dollars Includes a small amount for subsidies to business Less than million dollars * In cash payments to the public the Post Office is included on a net basis. The whole deficit is shown here as a subsidy and included in the business category since the deficit arises primarily because of the subsidy to mail other than first class NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Adjustments to receipts and expenditures The adjustments to receipts and expenditures shown in table reconcile the sum of the accounts of consumers business government and net foreign investment with the gross national product. The latter includes only expenditures for the current production of goods and services. The Government account however includes total Government cash payments whether involving purchase of the current output of goods and services purchases of existing assets or merely transfers of purchasing power to certain groups in the economy. Private transfers such as gifts have by and large not been taken into account. Receipts in the various accounts again include income arising from Government transfers and are not comparable with income arising from transactions in goods and services The adjustments include transfer payments purchase or sale of existing assets and other transactions which must be deducted to arrive at the gross national product. Details of the adjustments are shown in tables and According to table " Adjustments to expenditures " transfers to individuals including social-security benefits veterans ' bonuses pensions and allowances and similar payments account for a large part of the total Cash payments of interest on the Federal debt which are also defined as a transfer of purchasing power are a second large item. Loans to foreign governments or subscriptions to the International Fund or Bank are similar to domestic transfers since they involve an addition to the purchasing power or ability of foreign countries to obtain goods from the United States.2 In addition to transfers of purchasing power discrepancies in timing between the time cash payment is made and the time production is directly affected must be eliminated Government transfer payments to individuals and interest payments must be eliminated from receipts as well as payments. Receipts from the sale of surplus property must also be deducted since sales of surplus involve only transfers of existing assets rather than current production. In addition a number of adjustments must be made for the difference between the time taxes accrue from current production and the time the Government records receipts. A summary of the adjustments to receipts is shown in table Table details the reconciliation between cash receipts and the estimates of taxes used by the Department of Commerce in developing estimates of gross national receipts and expenditures Sales of surplus property are included among the adjustments for a somewhat different reason. Such sales are included as part of net foreign investment and since they do not involve current production an offsetting entry must be made to arrive at the gross national product T A B L E Reconciliation of cash payments to the public goods and services with Government expenditures for Calendar year and January-June [ Billions of dollars ] Description JanuaryJune annual rates adjusted i Cash payments to the public ( Federal State and local ) Less : Adjustments Transfers to individuals Tax refunds _ Cash interest payments to the public _ Transfers to business> _ Loans to foreign governments Subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund Sales of surplus abroad Adjustment for Government enterprises * _ Miscellaneous trust account payments _ Adjustments for time lags Noncash expenditures for goods and services _ Plus : Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reportsTotal adjustments _ _ Equals : Government expenditures for goods and services ._ Plus : Expenditures of consumers business and net foreign investment Equals : Gross national product or expenditure __ Estimates based on incomplete data Includes Government subsidies domestic sales of consumer-type surplus property and capital transactions. Domestic sales of consumer-type surplus property are deducted because they are included in consumer expenditures for goods and services Sales of surplus property abroad are deducted because they are included in net foreign investment The figure shown above does not correspond with miscellaneous receipts for sale of surplus abroad since the figure shown in this table includes sale of goods on credit Includes net expenditures of Government enterprises which do not represent capital formation Includes adjustments necessary to bring payments into conformity with the current output of goods and services. Net receivables and prepayments are deducted and an adjustment made for military pay certificates issue of special currency etc Includes contributions of Government and Government employees to retirement funds and Government contributions to national service life and Government life insurance NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E Adjustments to receipts { or income ) in the Nation 's Economic Budget Calendar year and January-June [ Billions of dollars ] January-June annual rates seasonally adjusted Description Total receipts ( or income ) __ Less : Adjustments Receipts of Government transfer payments Receipts of Government interest payments Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises Adjustments to Government cash receipts s Total adjustments Less : Statistical discrepancy Equals : Gross national receipts 271A * Estimates based on incomplete data * These figures do not a ^ ree with cash interest payments by Government ( table ) since net interest payments are included in consumer income These adjustments which reconcile cash receipts from the public with the tax series used in estimating business and personal income are shown in table NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E Reconciliation of cash receipts with tax series arising from of goods and services current production Calendar year and January-June Receipts January-June annual rates seasonally adjusted 1Q47 Cash receipts from the public Less : Excess of business tax receipts over liabilities Excess of personal tax receipts over payments Receipts from sales of domestic surplus property Receipts from sales of foreign surplus property Other receipts from abroad Miscellaneous trust 8account receipts Plus : Noncash receipts Equals : Tax receipts arising from current production of goods and services .a i Estimates based on incomplete data * Primarily reimbursable lend-lease * Includes contributions of Government and Government employees to retirement funds and Government contributions to national service life and Government life insurance funds NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Appendix B The Distribution of Consumer Income and Ownership of Liquid and Other Assets Tables Page Share of total money income received by each tenth of the Nation 's spending units when ranked by size of income and Distribution of families and spending units by income level before and after Federal income tax Distribution of spending units by income level and type of income change from to Selected components of saving and Proportion of liquid assets held by spending units and family units in early by income level Distribution of spending units by size of liquid asset holdings in early and Proportion of spending units reducing liquid assets in by purpose of withdrawal and by income level Distribution of spending units holding various types of assets by type of asset held in early and by income level Distribution of Consumer Income and Ownership of Liquid and Other Assets The following appendix is intended to supplement the text section " Consumer income expenditure and saving " page mainly by presenting factual material from which the conclusions of the text are drawn Topics relate to changes in the equality of the distribution of income between and the distribution of income before and after income tax income increases and decreases between and saving and dissaving and the distribution of ownership of liquid and other assets by consumers Equality of the distribution of income The degree of equality in the distribution of money income has remained substantially unchanged between and according to a survey of consumers made early in This is indicated by the fact that when the Nation 's spending units are ranked according to their incomes from lowest incomes to highest the proportion of the total money income of the Nation going to each tenth of the spending units has remained almost constant.2 This is shown in the following table : The stability of the above distributions between and is in contrast to the significant decrease in income concentration from and to described in the Economic Report of January The reasons for the increase in the degree of equality over the war period ha ^ ve not been completely analyzed but the following factors were probably the most important : ( ) The decrease in unemployment and underemployment ( ) the increase in the number of families with more than one earner ( ) the rise in farm income relative to the total and ( ) the narrowing of wage differentials The Survey of Consumer Finances conducted for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System by the Survey Research Center of Ann Arbor Mich. This survey was made for the third consecutive year. Extensive data on distribution of income liquid asset holdings consumer purchases of durable goods etc. drawn from these surveys have been published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin during the last years A spending unit consists of related persons who live together and pool their incomes for their major items of expense TABLE Share of total money income received by each tenth of the Nation 's spending units when ranked by size of income and l Percent of total money income before taxes Spending units ranked from lowest to highest income By tenths Lowest tenth. Second tenth Third tenth _ _ Fourth tenth.. Fifth tenth Sixth tenth Seventh tenth Eighth tenth Ninth tenth. Highest tenth 2..._ __ _ ' _ Cumulative q ? ? ? Income data for are based on interviews in January-March ; for on interviews in JanuaryMarch It is possible that the proportion of income received by the highest tenth of income receivers is underestimated by several percentage points in all years. Samples of approximately spending units have been used in these surveys ; owing to the dispersion of higher incomes it can not be expected that a completely representative sample of the highest dollar incomes was obtained The slight change in concentration in these deciles may be due to sampling variations Source : Based on data from the Survey of Consumer Finances conducted for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System by the Michigan Survey Research Center. The methods used in the survey are described in the Federal Reserve Bulletin June p. Between and some of the reasons for the previous trend toward an increased degree of equality continued such as a continued rise in farm incomes and a further increase in employment. In the light of the development during previous years it might have been expected that this trend would result in a continued improvement in the income distribution. However the Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that the distribution of income by deciles has remained the same. An explanation may be that the favorable effect of employment conditions was offset by the unfavorable effects of inflation. Inflation per se tends to increase the inequality of income distribution since many families particularly in the lower brackets have relatively or entirely fixed incomes Distribution of income before and after tax The distribution shown above and the distributions shown for in the Economic Report of January relate to money income before tax For some purposes however it is of more interest to know the distribution of income after tax. Until the present data have been inadequate to present reliable distributions on an " after tax " basis. Through the cooperation of several agencies distributions of families and of spending units by income level before and after Federal income tax are now presented for in table Families as well as spending units are included in table for the sake of comparability with distributions for other years and from other sources The family consists of related persons living in the same dwelling ( persons living alone are considered as separate families ) and may comprise more than one spending unit if some of the members of the family manage their income separately TABLE Distribution of families and spending units by income level before and after Federal income tax,1 Percent of families Percent of spending and single indiunits viduals Money income class Before tax After tax Under $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over Before tax After tax i Estimated Federal income tax liability excluding the tax on capital gains Source : See table Technical notes to Table Preliminary investigations indicate that the survey data as presented in table are sufficiently reliable to show the approximate effect of Federal income-tax liabilities on the distribution of families by income level. In this connection it should be mentioned that the tax liability was not based directly on information obtained in interviews or on tax returns but on an estimate of the tax liability made from comprehensive data concerning family composition and income assembled in connection with the Survey of Consumer Finances. Further work must be completed to relate the distribution after tax to the adjusted distribution before tax for ( see Table a below ) and to determine more precisely the effect of the tax on the concentration of income Study of available prewar data on the distribution of taxes by income level is also under way with the object of presenting in a future report a comparison of the effect of the Federal income-tax on the distribution of income between a current and a prewar year The distribution of families before taxes shown above is not comparable with that presented for on page of the Economic Report of January The distribution was based on survey data which had been adjusted in such a way as to make it agree with certain independently determined national aggregates of income and of family numbers. For purposes of comparison both adjusted and unadjusted distributions are shown below for and : TABLE a. Distribution of families by income level adjusted and unadjusted basis in and Percent of families Money income before taxes Survey data Under $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over All units Adjusted survey data * Survey data Adjusted survey data J * Revised Preliminary For a description of the methods of adjustment for and incomes see the January Economics Report page As stated in that report the estimated number of families and single individuals in the civilian noninstitutional population on December was The comparable figure for December is according to a preliminary estimate. Total civilian money income was billion dollars in and billion dollars in according to recently revised data. The percentage expansion of the distributions after adjustment for population coverage was percent in and percent in The adjusted distributions for both and are preliminary since both the income aggregates and population numbers are subject to further revision Table shows that about two-thirds of families ( including single individuals ) had money incomes under $ before taxes and percent had money income below $ After payment of taxes there was an increase in the number of families in all income brackets under $ and a decrease in all brackets above this. Nearly three-fourths of the families had incomes of less than $ Increases and decreases in income Although there was a general rise in personal incomes between and many families did not share in the increase. Of the spending units having increases in income only percent were in the under $ group which includes percent of total spending units. Only percent were in the under $ group which accounted for percent of the spending units. Thus income increases were somewhat more frequent in the higher income groups in relation to the number of people in those groups.1 In evaluating table it should be remembered that spending units have been grouped according to income received in Units with income increases between and are now classed according to the higher incomes received in while units whose income decreased are'classed according to the lower income to which they moved. Thus the basis of classification exaggerates somewhat the impression that income increases were more concentrated at levels above $ or $ Units with relatively fixed incomes are found most frequently in the lower income brackets. The proportion of persons in the lower brackets whose income is fixed such as pensioners and annuitants widows etc. has undoubtedly increased over the war period and during the subsequent inflation. The income of low-wage earners and marginal farmers has increased in relation to that of retired persons and those receiving Government stipends or allowances changing the composition of the lowest income groups TABLE Distribution of spending units by income level and type of income change from to i Percent of spending units Change in income to money income before taxes Total Increase in income Under $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ 7,500jand over Decrease in income All units _ Same income i Based on changes in amount of annual income received as reported by spending units in early Income which had not changed by more than percent in either direction was considered to " remain the same. " Source : See table Saving and dissaving In almost three-fourths of all spending units saved while onefourth spent in excess of income. The proportion of families dissaving was not very different from that of but the amounts involved increased considerably. Since saving on the part of people who saved remained fairly constant net saving declined between and ( See appendix C table ) Saving took the principal forms of an increase in currency and bank deposits life insurance corporate securities and in homes and other direct investments. Purchasers of durable goods such as automobiles are not considered as saving. Dissaving was mainly in the form of an increase in consumer debt and decreases in holdings of liquid assets such as Government bonds and bank deposits. The amounts of selected components of personal saving or dissaving in and were as follows : T A B L E Selected components of saving ) and [ Billions of dollars ] Amount of saving Item of saving Currency and bank deposits * U. S. Government securities l State and local government securities Corporate and other securities Private pension and insurance reserves Liquidation of debt : Mortgage d e b t _ Installment debt Other consumer debt Nonfarm dwellings -l.C Excludes holdings by unincorporated business and trusts Includes holdings by unincorporated business and trusts Debt on to 4-family non-farm-residential structures Installment sale credit and installment loans Single-payment loans charge accounts and sale credit Construction of to 4-family nonfarm dwellings less net acquisition of properties by non-individuals Also includes a small amount of construction by nonprofit institutions NOTE. Minus items indicate dissaving Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( currency and bank deposits U. S. Government bonds installment debt andfother consumer debt ) Securities and Exchange Commission ( insurance reserves State and local and corporate securities mortgage debt and nonfarm dwellings ) Ownership of liquid and other assets The accumulation of liquid assets is only one form of saving but as the text of this report states it is the form of saving which is most clearly anti-inflationary. Furthermore a cushion to future downward fluctuations in demand is provided by a wide dispersion of liquid-asset holdings among all groups of the poulation and all income levels. The distribution of liquid assets by income level is at present very unequal although substantial amounts are held by families at every level. As shown in table percent of the families whose incomes were less than $ had only percent of the liquid assets in T A B L E Proportion of liquid assets held by spending units and income level * family units in early by Family units Percent of families _ _ Percent of liquid assets held Percent of spending units annual money income before taxes Under $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over All units Spending units Percent of liquid assets held * The income data and early liquid assets data are based on interviews in January-March For comparable spending unit data in early and see the Federal Reserve Bulletin July table p. Comparable family unit data are presented in table p. Source : See table The proportion of spending units with no liquid assets increased from to percent between and and the proportion with no assets or less than $ worth of assets increased from to percent. In early percent of spending units had less than $ in liquid assets as show in Table TABLE Distribution of spending units by size of liquid asset holdings in early and Percent of spending units Amount of liquid assets i None _. $ to $ 199._ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ 2,999._ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over All units. _ $ $ Median holdings of all units Median holdings of units with assets $ $ i Includes all types of U. S. Government bonds checking accounts and savings accounts in banks and savings and loan associations postal savings and shares in credit unions Source : See table Table presents an analysis of decreases in asset holdings over the past year. The main reasons for decreasing asset holdings are shown for three income ranges under $ $ to $ and $ and over. Purchases of nondurable consumer 's goods and services ( living-expense items ) were given as the sole reason for reducing liquid assets by percent of the under $ groups and by percent of the $ to $ income group. Of those having over $ income living-expense items were less important than acquisition of durable goods homes and other investments Thus in a large proportion of cases in the upper income groups liquid assets were converted into other types of saving T A B L E Proportion of spending units reducing liquid assets in by purpose of and by income level withdrawal Percent of spending units reducing liquid assets mouey income before taxes Nondurable goods and services l All purposes Under $ $ to $ $ and over All units Automobiles Houses and Several investand other purposes durable ments * goods i Includes living expenses emergencies and sickness repair of houses and other nondurable consumption ( repairs of automobiles and other durable goods purchase of luxury goods moving travel amusement education and taxes ) * Includes purchases of real estate investment in business or securities and repayment of debt The distribution of spending units reducing liquid assets for several purposes is as follows : Percent Nondurable consumers goods etc. and durable goods Nondurable consumers goods etc. and houses and investments Durable goods and houses and investments Other combinations Total Source : See table Table presents data on ownership of various types of non-liquid assets in early by income groups. The ownership of almost all types of assets increases as income rises with the exception of homes. The proportion of persons owning homes appears to be larger in the under $ group than in the $ to $ to $ intervals. In the lowest income group only percent of spending units have life insurance and only percent own any kind of liquid assets T A B L E Distribution of spending units holding various types of assets by type of asset held in early and by income level Percent of spending units holding assets money income before taxes Liquid assets Life insurance Automobile Home Under $ $ to $ $ to $ _ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and overAll units.. Unincorporated business Stocks and bonds i Checking accounts and savings accounts in banks and saving and loan associations postal savings and shares in credit unions and U. S. Government bonds Percent of non-farm population occupying their own homes * Excluding U. S. Government bonds Source : See table Appendix C Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power CONTENTS National Income : Gross national product or expenditure Disposition of gross national product National income by distributive shares Personal income Disposition of personal income Per capita disposable income in current dollars and dollars Employment and Wages : Labor force Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Average hourly earnings in selected industries Production and Business Activity : Physical production index Industrial production index New construction activity Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Business inventories and sales Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Prices : Consumers ' price index Wholesale price index Index of prices received and of prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Money Banking and Credit : Consumer credit outstanding Loans and investments of all commercial banks Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks Estimated ownership of Federal securities Corporate Profits and Finance : Profits before and after taxes all private corporations Profits after taxes large private industrial corporations by industry groups Page Corporate Profits and Finance Continued Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment private manufacturing corporations by industry groups Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry groups Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size classes Sources and uses of corporate funds International Transactions : The international transactions of the United States United States Government aid to foreign countries United States merchandise exports including reexports by continents quarterly average and United States general merchandise imports by continents quarterly average and United States merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and United States imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and Indexes of quantity and unit value of recorded United States imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and Summary : Changes in selected economic series since and since the first half of Page Ill Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power TABLE Gross national product or expenditure 7929-48x [ Billions of dollars ] Period Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures GovernGross priment purvate do- Net foreign chases of mestic in- investment goods and vestment services Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter., Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of 2Commerce. For detail see the Survey of Current Business July Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE Disposition of gross national product Disposition of gross national product Export surplus of 3goods and services Total Period national product Total Government Product war or for national domestic Financed Financed defense civilian by Govuse ernment by other expenditures means aid Billions of dollars ( ) 12G.5 Annual rates : First half Second half ~ -First half * First quarter Second quarter. Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter. ? First quarter Second quarter _ Percentage of total First half... Second half. First half First quarter..._ Second quarter Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter- First quarter Second quarter * ( ' ) The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the Survey of Current Business July U. S. Government transfers to foreign countries are included in the export surplus and are excluded from the Government war or national defense expenditures Less than $ * Estimates based on incomplete data * Percent not shown because dollar figure was less than $ NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Bureau of the Budget TABLE National income by distributive shares ! [ Billions of dollars ] Proprietors ' and rental income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Corporate profits Period Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half.. Second half _ First half ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second q u a r t e r ' The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of 2Commerce. For detail see the Survey of Current Business July National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals or businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix C table ) and employer and employee contributions for social insurance * Net income after inventory valuation adjustment. This adjustment was billion dollars in billion ( annual rate ) in fourth quarter of and billion ( annual rate ) in the first half of Federal and State income and excess-profits taxes Less than $ Estimates based on incomplete data ; profits by Council of Economic Advisers and all others by Department of Commerce NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE At. Personal income * [ Billions of dollars ] Period Salaries Proprie- Dividends Nonagriwages Total and Transfer cultural personal and other tors ' and personal payments personal rental interest labor income income income income income Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half 1948-Firsthalf * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter T h e figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the Survey of Current Business July Differs from " compensation of employees " in appendix C table in that it excludes employer and employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor i n c o m e compensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims a See appendix C table for major components * Equals personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE Disposition of personal income 48l Period Less : PerPersonal sonal tax income and nontax payments Equals : Less : Per- Equals : Dispos- sonal con- Personal Net saving as able sumption net personal expendsaving percent of disposincome itures able income Billions of dollars Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half.- Second half _ First half K First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter ? The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the Survey of Current Business July Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE Per capita disposable income in current dollars and dollars Per capita disposable Disposable personal income Population Consumers ' personal ( thouincome price index sands ) * ( billions * Current of dollars ) i dollars * dollars Period _ _1938 _ _ _ _ _ __ ._ _ _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted Not adjusted for Annual rates seasonally adjusted seasonal variation First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter ' _ _ _____ The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the Survey of Currerif Business July Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period interpolated from published monthly estimates Current dollars divided by the consumers ' price index on the base = to give a rough measure of changes in buying power of disposable income * A small part of the increase may be seasonal * Estimates based on incomplete data Sources : Department of Commerce ( disposable income and population ) and Department of Labor ( consumers ' price index. ) TABLE Laborforce [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Civilian labor force Total labor force ( including Armed Period armed forces ) Monthly average : forces Employment Total civilian labor force Total Unem- Nonagri- Agriculcultural tural ployment .-_1944 First half Second half _- April May June _ July August September October November January February March April May June _ _ First half January February March NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments * [ Thousands of employees ] Period Monthly average : FedManufacturing Transeral Total Con- portaState wage Fi- Serv- and Min- tract tion and con- and salary Dur- Non- ing struc- public Trade nance ice local govwork- Total able durable tion utilerners goods goods ities ment " : 6,91f ' 6,G49 1947_ 2,06r : 4J63 First half. Second half : First half * January FebruaryMarch April May June July August September. October November. December. January. _ FebruaryMarch April May June ( ) " Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors selfemployed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce ( appendix C table ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary lay-off ; and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Not available * Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Bituminous Dur- Non- coal durable able mining Total goods goods Period Monthly average : 1933._1934 $ First half Second half First half Private building construction $ $ ( ) $ ( ) A Class I steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels sale ( year rail- phone trade trade round ) * roads ( ) I $ ( ) ( ) $ $ $ $ ( ) < s January February.. March April May June _ July __August September October Nobember December. January _ February March April May June ( * ) i Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips are not included a Not available s Not available. New series beginning April ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees * Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages Average for months Data for these months reflect work stoppages ' Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining and for all employees in other industries Source : Department of Labor TABLE Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Private Bitu- building Non- minous conDura- dura- coal strucTotal ble ble mining tion goods goods Period Monthly average : $ Class I steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels sale ( year rail- phone trade trade round ) roads $ $ ( ) ( ) $ $ First half Second half First half January February. _ March April __ May June July August September October NovemberDecember. _ * January February March April6 May June ._ ( ) $ ( ) ( ( ) ( ) $ $ $ < $ 6C9 ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms arid tips are not included Not available ' Not available. New series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees * Annual avorai ^ includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages Average for months Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining and for all employees in other industries Source : Department of Labor TABLE Physical production index [ = seasonally adjusted ] Nonagricultural production Total production Period Weights i Total Nonagricultural Agricultural production Minerals Total TransConManufactures struction portation Electric and gas utilities -_ First half Second half ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) First half * ( ) ( ) Computed from the D e p a r t m e n t of Commerce data of national income. T h e weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the t o t a l for the industries. T h e weight for construetion has been adjusted to include force account a n d other construction done outside of the contract construction industry the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction Not available. See footnote Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed * Estimates based on incomplete d a t a Sources : Based on the following data : Agricultural production. Department of Agriculture index of farm outfjut which measures the physical volume of farm production for human use Minerals. Federal Reserve index of mineral production Manufactures. Federal Reserve index of manufacturing production Construction. Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated b y their index of construction costs and converted into relatives with as Transportation. Department of Commerce index of transportation. T h e figures for and first half of are estimated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the basis of transportation d a t a Electric and gas utilities. Based on the following series- Electric power generated for public use as reported by the Federal Power Commission and sales of gas to consumers as reported by the American Gas Association. T h e two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period as T h e relative scries are combined into an index of public utility production with electric power given a weight of and gas the respective percentages of the revenues by each of the utilities to the total revenues produced by both in the base period TABLE Industrial production index [ = seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Period Monthly average : Minerals Durable Total Nondurable _ _ _ First half Second half January February March April May June First half * January February March April May June July August September October November _ December _ Manufactures i Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE New construction activity [ Millions of dollars ] Private construction Public construction By source of funds Period Total new ResiPubcondential Nonlic resistruc- Total build- dential utilprition i ing buildvate ( nonand ings farm ) farm Total public Federal By type of construction Military and fedOther State erally High- puband ways local lic financed industrial Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal First half... Second half First half... January February March. April May June July August September October November December January February March April May June i Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new-construction expenditures in the gross national product a Excludes farm and public utility ; for includes negligible amount of public industrial and commercial building not segregable NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Departments of Commerce and Labor TABLE Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Period Total i Total Manufacturing Mining Transportation Railroad Other Electric and gas utilities Commercial and miscellaneous ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) S65 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ _ ( ) Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal First half Second half First half First quarter ___ Second quarter T h i r d quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter f i T h i r d quarter Excludes agriculture Includes trade service finance and communication for all years shown. Also includes prior to transportation other than railroad and electric and gas utilities not available separately for those years Not available separately for years prior to * Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to Estimates for second and third quarters of were based upon anticipated capital expenditures of business NOTE. These figures do not agree with the totals included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover agricultural investment and also certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE Business inventories and sales Manufacturing i Period Wholesale Retail Millions of dollars Ratio of Millions of dollars Ratio of Millions of dollars Ratio of Inventories Sales * inventories to sales Inventories Sales * inventories to sales Inventories Sales * inventories to sales First half Second half.. First half ._._ January February March April May June July August September October November December 4/9 ^ January February March April e May Not adjusted for seasonal variation Adjusted for seasonal variation s Book value end of period Monthly average shown for year and half year and total for month Average of months Preliminary NOTE. Manufacturing inventories and sales and retail inventories are recently revised series ; revisions for wholesale are to be completed in the near future. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) TABLE Sales3 stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Millions of dollars * Period Sales ( total for month ) Monthly average : Stocks ( end of month ) Outstanding orders ( end of month ) Ratio of stocks to sales Ratio of orders to sales Ratio of orders to stocks First half Second half First half January February March _ _ April _ May June _July August September October November December January February March April May June _ Not adjusted for seasonal Not available Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. These figures represent retail sales stocks and outstanding orders as reported fcy a sample of of the larger department stores located in various cities throughout the country and are not estimates of total sales stocks and outstanding orders for all department stores in the United States. Data are not available prior to | i Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding ffSource : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE Consumers ' price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ = ] Period All items Food Apparel Rent Fuel elec- House tricity furnishand ice Miscellaneous Monthly averager Ill. First half Second half First half June January February March April May June July August September October November December January February March. __ April. ..__ May June Source : Department of Labor TABLE Wholesale price index [ = ] <x> e ^ ^ w a fl 0CST3 a B tea S3 o3 a if ! > T3 H | I _ s a S Average : ! f'l If I oS Foods Period Farm products All commodities Other than farm products and foods H5.5 First half Second half -a S I c la ffl i bl W First half. _ __ June _. January February March _ _ _ _ _ April May June July August _ September October November _ December January February March April May June Source : Department of Labor TABLE Index of prices received and of prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ = ] Prices received i Period Monthly average : Prices paid ( including interest and taxes ) Parity ratio a First half. Second half January February March April May June July August September October .__ November December January February March April May June First half.. August to July = Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest and taxes ) Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE Consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] End of period Total consumer credit Instalment credit i Charge accounts Other consumer credit 1931_ 1936..._ _ January.. February. March April May June July August September October.. November December January.. _ February. March April May June ? _ _ __ Includes automobile and other sale credit and repair and modernization loans insured by Federal House ing Administration Includes single-payment loans of commercial banks and pawnbrokers and service credit Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] Total loans and investments End of month Investments Loans Total U. S. Government obligations Other securities Junel -June l June June1 June * June June1 December December ._ December December December December December D ecember December _ -_ December June Dpinpmbfir June December June * _ _. _ Complete end-of-year figures are not available for years prior to Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks [ Billions of dollars ] End of period Total deposits U.S adjusted Governand ment currency depositsl outside banks Other deposits and currency outside banks Total Demand Time Currency deposits outside adjusted deposits banks June December -_ y June December. __ June i Beginning with December includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account * Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection ' Include ? deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and postal savings system < Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE Estimated ownership of Federal securities [ Billions of dollars par values ] Gross debt and guaranteed obligations outstanding Held by public End of period Total December December December December December December December December. necember June9 _ _ _ Held by U. S. Government agencies and trust funds Nonbank private State Com- Federal financial and Total local mercial Reserve corporagovern- banks banks tions and associaments tions * Individuals * United States sayings bonds series A-D E and F are included at current redemption values Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and Territories and insular possessions Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and insular possessions. Figures exclude securities held in trust departments * Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country. Beginning with December includes investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and International Monetary Fund in special non-interest bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department TABLE Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Period Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.. Second quarter i Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes a Minus million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE Profits after taxes large private industrial corporations by industry groups [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Period _ Number of companies _ _ _ Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter... Profits after Federal and State income and excess-profits taxes Includes companies engaged in wholesale and retail trade ( largely department stores ) in the amusement industry in shipping and transportation other than railroads ( largely air lines ) and companies furnishing scattered types of service Source : Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published reports of various industrial corporations TABLE Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate Profits before taxes as percent of sales Profits after taxes as percent of sales Industry group All industries excluding finance insurance and real estate Mining.._ Manufacturing Metal industries _ Other manufacturing _ Wholesale and retail trade Transportation Communications and public utilities All other industries _ first quarter i first quarter l Estimates based on incomplete data Includes agriculture forestry and fisheries and contract construction Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment private corporations by industry groups manufacturing Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Industry group total First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food ..__ Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products _ Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products ' Stone clay and glass products Piimary n on ferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery. Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks __ Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures __ Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products ____ Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products _ _._ Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) _ Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry groups Profits in cents per dollar of sales Industry group total First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures.Textile mill products _ Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) ._ Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products. Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products __ _ Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks _._ __ Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products. _ Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries. _ Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods : watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size classes Before Federal taxes After Federal taxes Assets class ( thousands of dollars ) Total First Second Third Fourth quar- quar- quar- quar- Total ter ter ter ter First Second Third Fourth quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter ter first quarter i Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes ( ) Ito249 to to to and over.__ ( ) Profits in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to to to and over.. Estimates based on incomplete data Not available Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE Sources and uses of corporate funds [ Billions of dollars ] Use or source of funds Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( increase in book value ) Increase in customer financing __ Net repayment of trade debt Net repayment of short-term bank loans Net repayment of RFC loans Reduction in liability for Federal income tax first halfi Total sources of funds Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) _.. Total uses of funds. Sources : Internal sources : Funds retained from operations : Depreciation reserves. Retained net earnings and depletion allowances Reduction in cash and U S Government securities Reduction in other current assets External sources : Increase in bank loans : Short-term Long-term __ __ Increase in mortgage loans Net new security issues : Bonds Stocks. Increase in liability for Federal income tax Increase in trade debt Other net sources c> Estimates of total for half year based on incomplete data ; not adjusted for seasonal variation Net increase of such debt ; see sources Net increase of such liability : see sources * Estimate based on preliminary first quarter data Net repayment of such debt ; see uses Net reduction of such liability ; see uses Sources ' Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data TABLE The international transactions of the United States [ Millions of dollars ] Item Total Exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods First Second T h i r d Fourth First quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Second quarteri Total goods Services Income on investments. Total surplus of exports. Total goods Services Income on investments. Total exports Imports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods Total goods _ Services Income on investments. Total imports Surplus of exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods. _ Means of financing : Net liquidation of gold and dollar assets by : Foreign countries International Monetary F u n d Loan disbursements by International Bank Net United States private capital outflow to foreign countries Net U. S. Government loans Net U. S. Government unilateral transfers Net private unilateral transfers. Total means of financing Errors and omissions e Estimates based on incomplete data Figures for recorded exports of goods in and have been adjusted to include goods shipped to United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas in order to make them comparable with figures for Such shipments are included in exports as recorded by the Bureau of the Census in but were not so included in prior years Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United States customs area and other adjustments NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE United States Government aid to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] A. Unilateral payments : Straight lend-lease _ UNRRA Post-UNRRA Civilian supplies for occupied areas European recovery program Greek-Turkish aid._._ Chinese aid International Refugee Organizations Transfers to Philippines ._ Interim aid Other Total unilateral payments.. Less : Unilateral receipts. Equals : Net unilateral payments B. Long-term loans and investments : Lend-lease credits _ Surplus property including ship sales Export-Import Bank United Kingdom loan Investment in International Bank Investment in International Monetary Fund Other Total long-term loans and investments Less : Repayments Equals : Net long term loans and investments including International Bank and International Fund.. Less : Investments in International Bank and International Fund Equals : Net long term loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Fund_._ T h i r d Fourth First Second First Total quarter Second quarter quarter quarter quarter ^ quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ! Type of aid } * ) ) Short-term loans ( net ) : Net unilateral payments and loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Fund i Estimates based on incomplete data a Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E United States Period merchandise exports including reexports quarterly average and Total merchandise North exports including America reexports South America Europe by continents Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Millions of dollars Quarterly average Quarterly average. First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter i HI Percentage of total Quarterly average Quarterly average.. First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter i m Based on actual figures for April and May and estimates for June NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in and goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE United Slates general merchandise imports by continents quarterly average and Period Total general imports North America South America Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Millions of dollars Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * Quarterly average Percentage of total Quarterly average Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter x * Based on actualfiguresfor April and May and estimates for June NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising channels plus entires into bonded customs warehouses. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce no TABLE United States merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and Total merchandise exports Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semi manufactures Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average Quarterlv average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter i Percentage of total Quarterly average. Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * _ _. i Based on actual figures for April and May and estimates for June NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in and goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Ill TABLE Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and [ = ] Total merchandise exports Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * no Unit value indexes Quarterly average Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter.. _ Fourth quarter 1S8 First quarter Second quarter i _ _ i Based on calculated indexes for April and M a y and estimates for June N O T E The indexes of quantity are a measure of changes in the total volume of trade after the influence on values of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of changes in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. The indexes for and are based on data which include goods destined to the United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE United States imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and Total imCrude ports for sonsumption materials Period Crude food- Manufactured stuffs foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter l Second quarter Quarterly average Percentage of total Quarterly average Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter l Second quarter Based on actual figures for April and May and estimates for June NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign countries. Imports for consumption include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels plus withdrawals from bonded customs warehouses for consumption Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE Indexes of quantity and unit value of recorded United Slates importsfor consumption by economic classes quarterly average and [ = ] Total imports for onsumption Period Crude materials Crude food- Manufactured stuffs foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average... Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * ~ Unit value indexes Quarterly average Quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter i i Based on calculated indexes for April and May and estimates for June NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of changes in the total volume of trade after the influence on values of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of changes in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E Changes in selected economic series since and since the first half of = Source : Appendix C table number Economic series Total Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment ..Government purchases of goods and services National income.._ _ Compensation of employees Personal income Disposable personal income Personal net saving _ Per capita disposable personal income : Current dollars dollars Labor force including armed forces Civilian labor force Employment _ Nonagricultural Agricultural Unemployment _ Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing _ Bituminous coal mining Private building construction Retail trade Physical production : total _ Agriculture Nonagriculture Industrial production index : total Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures Minerals New construction : total Private Residential Nonresidential Public utility and farm Public Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Inventories end of period : Manufacturing _ Wholesale Retail ss : Manufacturing _ Wholesale Retail _ Consumers ' price index : all items Food Apparel Rent Wholesale price index all commodities Farm products Foods Other than farm products and foods Prices received by farmers Prices paid by farmers ( including interest and taxes ) Parity ratio Consumer credit outstanding .end of period Corporate profits before taxes Corporate profits after taxes Dividend payments Undistributed profits First Second half half first half Percent change first half to first half ( i ) ( i ) ( i ) ( i ) ( i ) ) 30fi ? i Bfcau& of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production oniy an annual index has been computed Sources : Appendix C tables as indicated above. Data have been converted to the base = For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. C Price cents