The Midyear Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS July Together With a Report to the President THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The Midyear Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS July Together With a Report to the President THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES- GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. G Price of single copy cents II LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C. July The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith a Midyear Economic Report to the Congress. This is supplementary to the Economic Report of the President of January and is transmitted in accordance with section ( b ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this report I am transmitting a report The Economic Situation at Midyear prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully m CONTENTS Page THE MIDYEAR ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Expanding production and supply The duty of Government The responsibilities of individuals Summary of legislative recommendations Summary of economic developments in first half of THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR ( a report to the President by the Council of Economic Advisers ) To the Congress of the United States : Recent international events make it more important now than ever before that we maintain and expand our strength on the home front. For the sinews of all our strength everywhere in the world are found in what we achieve here at home. We must make full use of our great productive resources our ever-improving industrial and scientific techniques and our growing labor force. We must redirect a part of these resources to the task of resisting aggression. And in doing this we must not let inflation undermine our efforts The world responsibilities of the United States have become heavy Clearly they will become still heavier before the united efforts of the free nations of the world produce a lasting peace. The American people know how much is at stake. They are prepared to shoulder their tasks without flinching The facts should warn us equally against easy indifference and sensational alarm. This is not the time for business as usual. We are not now living under peaceful world conditions. But neither are we engaged in a general or widespread war. We are in a situation between these opposite extremes and economic policy should be guided accordingly. It is urgent to make some shifts in economic policy now. We must also speed up our preparation now to take more drastic action later if it should become necessary to do so Economic policy to the best of our ability and foresight should proceed in line with our appraisal of the developing situation. While it should not lag behind it should not run blindly ahead The international policy of the United States is directed toward averting a full-scale war. We are following the only course open to a free and strong nation in the face of the challenge confronting us. We are acting together with other free peoples through the United Nations to put down the aggression in Korea and to build the combined strength needed to deter aggression elsewhere The response of the whole Nation to developments in the Far East has already provided an overwhelming demonstration of unity in the conduct of our international policy. This has lifted the spirits of our friends all over the world. In these difficult times there is the same need for unity on the economic front here at home. If our economy should fail to realize its full potential our international strength and our domestic strength would both be affected. We can not afford division on the home front when some of our young men are fighting overseas. We can not afford an economy which performs below its best when nothing but the best will assure the triumph of freedom and of right This unity in our economic affairs is attainable. We have gathered a wealth of practical experience about how our economy works and about what promotes its strength and progress. Five years after the greatest of all wars and even before the events of last month we had reached the highest levels of peacetime production and employment ever known. We had passed through a period of inflation and conquered a postwar recession without permitting it to deepen into a depression. Based upon this record those who work in private enterprise and those who work in Government of both political parties have reached agreement upon many national economic policies. This is far more important than some of the surface disagreements We must expand the area of agreement in the trying times ahead. And trying times they will be. We must enlarge our military outlays and related programs when we had hoped to be able to reduce them further. We must realize that the engagement in Korea will be costly and may not be short We must prepare against the possibility that other crises may arise elsewhere. We must continue to recognize that both economic and military aid will be required for the further strengthening of the free peoples of the world All of this means new problems for our economy soluble problems but not easy ones Our economy has the human and material resources to do the job ahead if we achieve the unity which will enable us to do our best Strong evidence of the power of the United States economy is contained in the record of its performance during the first half of this year. That record is summarized at the end of this Economic Report and is detailed in the accompanying report of the Council of Economic Advisers " The Economic Situation at Midyear " Viewed in its entirety the economy at midyear had made a remarkable recovery from the moderate recession of New records of peacetime production employment and real incomes were reached. Reasonable balance of prices had been achieved. The outlook in mid-June was for stability and new growth on a sound basis. Toward the end of June however the Korean outbreak brought rapid changes. The necessity for large new public outlays began to have both economic and psychological impacts Many important prices commenced to rise rapidly. New private and public policies are needed quickly to deal with these new developments Expanding Production and Supply The productive strength of the American economy is basic to our domestic well-being and our international security. Under current conditions we face a twofold task : first to get as much total production as we can ; CHART PRODUCTION AND EMPLOYMENT GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ( PRICES ) BILLIONS OF DOLLARS INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION PERCENT OF AVERAGE ' ' | t ^ ii i * NOW ^ i j i i EMPLOYMENT ( CIVILIAN ) MILLIONS OF PERSONS -tS SECOND QUARTER I95O ANNUAL RATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED & JUNE I95O SEASONALLY ADJUSTED / JUNE SOURCES : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE and second. to emphasize the right kind of production and the best utilization of the product The more successful we are in this twofold task the less difficult it will be to meet promptly the increased military demand for goods and services both for ourselves and for the free nations associated with us without impairing the civilian economy or weakening the industrial potential upon which our military potential depends Increased production of the right kind of goods will lessen inflationary strains. If we allow inflation to develop by failing to take adequate measures it will cost more to meet our military requirements and it will be more difficult to maintain the smooth functioning of the economic machine and the high civilian efficiency and morale which are foundations of our military strength In the emergency created by World War II we were forced to enlarge our military strength until it absorbed almost one-half of the output of the economy. This built up such extensive inflationary pressures as to require all-inclusive controls. In the more limited current situation we should be able with more limited measures to meet our military requirements and at the same time to avoid inflation. This does not mean that we can meet our enlarged international obligations without some sacrifice of domestic consumption. Some sacrifice is called for and I am confident that the American people are ready to do their part. But in determining sound policy at this time we should measure the requirements of the present world situation against the recent growth and productive power of our economy and its capacity for further growth Our total output of goods and services measured in constant dollars ( price level ) was about billion in By it was about billion. In the first full year after the war it was about billion. Two years later in it was about billion. Despite the moderate recession in our total output is now running at an annual rate of about billion dollars. This rate is about billion dollars higher than a year ago and about billion higher than in the peak quarter of It is more than billion dollars higher than in All of these figures are stated in terms of the price level and therefore reflect real changes The index of industrial production was in and about the same in In the first full year after the war the index was At the middle of this year it had risen to higher than ever before in peacetime and points higher than the average for last year Civilian employment averaged * / % million in and 45J/2 million in It averaged 59/2 million in declined to 58/2 million in and mounted to almost 61/2 million in June An even more vivid illustration of the expanding strength of our economy is afforded by these specific items : CHART GROWTH OF PRODUCTION SELECTED ITEMS AND PERIODS ALUMINUM STEEL THOUSANDS OF SHORT TONS MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS I .i ELECTRIC POWER BITUMINOUS COAL BILLIONS OF KILOWATT HOURS MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS I i ' .._ : / ; i t " > : < " '. : ./. : ; ; A i \ \ : * r ; ' ^ : : \ I '. : .'.-. * \ \ t / ' ' " ' : PETROLEUM FOOD BILLIONS ' '1 PERCENT OF AVERAGE OF BARRELS I I i L JUNE I960 ANNUAL RATE FOR ALL ITEMS EXCEPT FOOD WHICH SHOWS ESTIMATE FOR NOTE : DATA INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING ITEMS : ALUMINUM-PRIMARY PRODUCTION ; STEEL-INGOTS AND STEEL FOR CASTING ; ELECTRIC POWER-UTILITY PRODUCTION ; PETROLEUM-CRUDE PRODUCTION THE WARTIME PEAK WAS FOR ALL EXCEPT ALUMINUM ( THOUSAND SHORT TONS ) SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL INSTITUTE FEDERAL POWER COMMISSION AND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE Steel production in was million tons and in it was million. During the war year it rose to a peak of million. The annual rate at the end of June was more than million an all-time record Aluminum production was thousand tons in and thousand in The current annual rate is thousand which is about percent higher than a year ago or two years ago and almost as high as the record output of thousand in the war year Electric power output rose from billion kilowatt hours in to billion in and to billion in the war year It has expanded each year since the war and now stands at an annual rate of billion We produced about a billion barrels of crude petroleum in and more than 1J4 billion in This rose to more than billion in the war year The figure now is well above that at an annual rate of about billion The index of food production which was in and in rose to during the war when we were feeding millions all over the world. It now stands at about These indications of our growing resources are not adjusted for increases in population. In many cases of course our total output is a more important measure of our economic strength than output per capita. But even allowing for population increases output per capita and standards of living are very much higher than before the war. For example civilian food consumption per capita in is estimated at about percent above the average ; and industrial production is about percent greater on a per capita basis Still another measure of our growing productive power is output per man-hour. Using as the base year it is estimated that the index of total output per man-hour for the American economy as a whole was about in During and since the war there have been great gains in productivity and for the first half of the best preliminary estimates indicate that the index has risen above Agriculture as well as industry has participated in these productivity gains. Farm output per worker has been about percent higher during the last four years than in the four years immediately prior to World War II These record levels of production and productivity make us better able to perform the new and harder tasks ahead. It is sometimes said that since there was a " slack " in the economy when World War II started which does not exist now we could then undertake a greater expansion more easily than we can now carry forward a smaller expansion. It is true that we are riow utilizing to the limit some plant capacities and some other facilities for production and distribution. Consequently the increasing military demand will necessitate measures to restrict less essential uses in order to maintain military supply ; and measures in some cases are needed to increase the total supply of vital materials. It is also true that any given amount of increased military outlays and procurement will produce in- CHART PRODUCTIVITY OUTPUT PER MAN-HOUR J/ PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE I960 FIRST J/ INDEX OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ( CONSTANT PRICES ) HALF PER MAN-HOUR NOTE : COMPARISONS BETWEEN PEACETIME AND WARTIME PERIODS SUBJECT TO CONSIDERABLE ERROR DUE TO CHANGES IN COMPOSITION OF OUTPUT SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS flationary pressures much more rapidly than if existing capacities and facilities were not already being so fully utilized. But clearly our economy is far more able to satisfy the additional requirements now to be imposed upon it than if it had not already risen to such high levels of fundamental productive capacity For example an economy is stronger for whatever tasks lie ahead when it is actually producing more than million tons of steel a year although this involves full utilization of its capacity than it would be if it were producing million tons of steel but had unused capacity of million tons. It is easier to divert part of the steel which is now being produced to new purposes than it would be to build the plants required to lift capacity from million tons to million. Likewise an economy which is employing 61J/2 million civilian workers with less than 3J/2 million unemployed is stronger for whatever tasks may lie ahead than if it were employing only million workers and had about million unemployed. It is easier to divert the production of skilled workers to new purposes or even to put them on new jobs than it would be to train millions of workers whose skills had been lost through years of enforced idleness. These examples apply to other sectors of the economy as well Furthermore while the business recovery has been pronounced since a year ago there is still some slack in the economy as a whole. We have not yet reached maximum employment and production. Even with exist- ing capacities, it is estimated that total industrial output could now be increased by some percent or possibly more and this would lift the index of industrial production from to nearly Unemployment which now stands at less than 3J/2 million could be reduced by to million that is to a level of about 2J/2 to IJ/i million without serious strain upon the labor force. There were times during the last war when civilian unemployment was less than million. There are also many part-time workers available for full-time jobs. Even without an unusual increase in the labor force or in hours of work the present material and human resources of our economy are sufficient to lift total production by the end of this year to an annual rate about to billion dollars above the current rate. This would result in an annual output rate at the end of this year of well over billion dollars ( measured in current prices ) Most important of all even when we shall have taken up the present slack in the economy we shall not have reached the longer-range limits of our total productive potential. National output per man-hour has in the long run increased about to 2/2 percent a year and total output which reflects also population growth has increased over percent a year. With the enormous improvements in plant and technology already accomplished this rate of increase should be equaled or even exceeded in the years immediately ahead. This means that with maximum employment and production achieved and then maintained in a growing economy it will be well within our reach to increase our total annual output in real terms by to billion dollars in and correspondingly in succeeding years This appraisal of our general productive strength is significant but it does not cover the whole situation with which we now must deal. The specific requirements of our enlarged military effort can not be spread over the whole economy. Instead they will fall most heavily upon certain sectors and our expansion of production can only partly be concentrated within these specific sectors. In many of these sectors moreover shortages and price increases were apparent even before the developments in Korea. These shortages have become more critical during the past month. They must be dealt with promptly not only to support the military effort but also because if they are allowed to get out of hand they will increase the dangers of general inflation The steel industry has been operating above rated capacity almost continuously since April and an increase in the military use of steel under the program which I have recommended will further increase the strain on supplies. Copper has been in such short supply that demand has exceeded output and domestic stocks have been dwindling. Aluminum production is now going forward at percent of capacity and is booked solid for six months ahead. And the stepped-up military and stockpiling program will add to demand These shortages and some others in strategic areas have been reflected in the price structure. During the first half of this year before the Korean situation wholesale price increases were generally moderate. But there were sharp increases in the prices of lumber copper zinc scrap steel and rubber. For example since January the price of copper has risen about percent and the price of zinc about percent. During the past four weeks rubber prices have risen about percent tin about percent print cloth about percent and wool tops about percent. The daily spot index of commodities has risen from a level of on June prior to the Korean outbreak to on July a rise of percent in four weeks In the interests of the military effort action is needed now to direct the use of some commodities essential to the national defense and in some cases to increase the output. This is necessary also to reduce inflationary pressures Thus we are faced with an over-all economic situation which is essentially strong although threatened by considerable general inflationary pressure coupled with intense and rising pressures in limited areas The Duty of Government A primary duty of Government is " to provide for the common defense. " In fulfilling this responsibility the test is not how far we can go without placing strain upon the domestic economy or without creating inflationary pressures. We must go as far as changing circumstances may require. In the final analysis there are no limits except our total strength to guide us in our determination to resist aggression and thus to strive for peace But the question remains as to how much of our total economic strength must be shifted from peacetime production to defense purposes in the current situation. On the basis of searching study of the best information now available I have recommended to the Congress the substantially increased programs which should now be undertaken to resist aggression and further to build up our preparedness. I have also indicated that other programs will be needed The realities of the current situation now require certain changes in national economic policy. These changes will take us in the right direction at once. And if the situation should become even more serious later on the measures which I now propose for the current situation are also the measures which would make us more ready for further steps Appropriate agencies of Government have for several years been preparing the detailed plans for these further steps if and when needed. If it should become necessary I shall without hesitation ask the Congress for the grant of the powers to implement these further plans whether for complete economic mobilization or for further intermediate action depending upon the need But the foregoing examination of our expanding material and human resources indicates that the substantial increases in our military forces and in supporting activities now under way do not call for a complete set of economic controls now if business labor and consumers practice modera- tion and if adequate steps are taken at once to adjust private and public policies and programs to our supply needs and to the curbing of inflation First of all for the immediate situation we should rely in major degree upon fiscal and credit measures. These general measures can be helpful not only in restraining inflationary pressures but also in reducing the civilian demand for some specific products such as automobiles and housing thus making available for necessary military use a larger proportion of an already short supply of some critical materials. The more prompt and vigorous we are with these general measures the less need there will be for all of the comprehensive direct controls which involve the consideration of thousands of individual situations and thus involve infinitely greater administrative difficulties and much greater interference with individual choice and initiative Since I made tax recommendations to the Congress in January the situation has changed drastically. There is now no need to reduce any taxes to stimulate business recovery. That recovery even before the development in Korea was more vigorous than most expected and increased military spending will now accelerate this trend. The need to reduce and as rapidly as possible to remove the deficit is also greater now because of the reappearance of strong inflationary forces. The amount of revenues required to accomplish this will also be greater because the military situation and the general world outlook make inevitable an overall increase in public outlays of many billions of dollars in this fiscal year. Substantial tax increases now are called for by the requirements of sound budget policy and by the threat of inflation. The general business situation makes this feasible I am therefore recommending for immediate action an interim revenue measure to yield about billion dollars of new revenue on a full year basis The tax bill now pending should be revised to produce these results. All excise tax cuts and other revenue-losing provisions should be eliminated The loophole closing the dividend withholding and the life insurance company provisions should be retained. The revised corporate income tax rate structure contained in the pending bill should be adjusted to provide a rate of percent on the first $ of income and percent on the balance beginning with incomes. Individual income tax rates should be increased to the " tentative " levels adopted in by removing the percentage reductions from those levels made in and This should be effective beginning with one-quarter of incomes and would be accompanied by an increase in the withholding rate from to percent beginning with the last quarter of The immediate enactment of this tax program is vital but this interim measure alone will not be enough. It will be necessary when the necessary studies can be completed and when the extent of our new obligations can be more clearly determined to raise still additional revenues to avoid a deficit during times when economic policy and budgetary policy call for a balanced budget or a surplus The sharp increase in defense outlays makes it imperative to reexamine all Federal programs which might compete for materials and other resources required for national defense. In addition to the restrictive policy already put in force for housing credit I have directed other agencies to revise their programs giving particular attention to public works projects loan programs and procurement and inventories of supplies and equipment The primary purpose of these actions is to reduce the demand for scarce resources and they will also help to reduce Federal expenditures. Some reductions in expenditures can be expected in agricultural price supports with the demand for foodstuffs high and in veterans ' readjustment benefits as employment opportunities increase. We should guard however against indiscriminate Budget slashes. Indeed in addition to direct military programs a number of other Government programs such as stockpiling and power development will have to be expanded in response to the international situation. We should act selectively curtailing those programs which compete with defense needs and orienting other operations to the support of the defense program In addition to action in the fields of taxation and expenditures other restraining measures of a general character are needed to deal with the extreme tightness of supply and the upward movement of prices in some important areas. These developments have occurred even with the economy somewhat below maximum production and employment and even before the events of last month. Such shortages and price movements could very quickly be aggravated by increases in military procurement by an intensification of consumer buying or business speculation supported by excessive credit or by a combination of these factors Even under less compelling circumstances I have urged that the Government should have certain credit-control authority to act promptly if necessary. I have on several occasions recommended that the Government 's authority to restrain consumer credit which terminated in the middle of should be restored. It is highly desirable that this be done now because many of the products financed by consumer credit are heavy users of materials critically needed for defense production The construction industry which is now operating at very high levels is also a major user of critical materials. With respect to types of housing credit extended directly or guaranteed or insured by Federal agencies I have already directed that limitations be imposed wherever permitted by existing law. Further authority to restrict real estate credit particularly privately financed loans should be granted. Authority is also needed to restrain commodity speculation These general restraining measures will reduce total demand and thus release materials for military uses. But they can not operate with sufficient speed or selectivity to serve the military need for those commodities where the shortage of supply is already apparent and will very quickly be intensified. These shortage situations if neglected could intensify the pressure II upon prices militate against an equitable distribution of available supply and thus force us to invoke more sweeping controls which might be avoided if we take more moderate action now. I am therefore recommending that the Congress immediately enact legislation to authorize the following : priorities and allocation of materials and facilities needed for the national defense and for essential civilian use ; limitation of nonessential uses ; restraint of inventory hoarding ; and requisitioning of supplies Such measures to assure the necessary distribution of available supply are essential. Our main effort however must be to concentrate upon production and more production. The generally strong condition of our economy affords assurance that production in general will move steadily forward. But shortages of some critical commodities are now so great that even with allocation measures we can have no assurance of enough supply for military security and essential civilian use. Moreover if future events should compel further rapid expansion of our military efforts it would then be too late to commence the lengthy process of increasing basic capacity and supply. Unlike some measures which can be delayed until the immediate need is greater this problem must be tackled long before the need becomes critical. I therefore recommend to the Congress for immediate action a program of guarantees and loans for capital expansion development of technological processes and production of essential materials We can not afford longer to risk the possibility of future desperate shortages of some of the most essential requirements for our national security Along with these special measures we must continue to concentrate on the over-all task of maintaining our general economy in maximum health and encouraging its productive impulses. It is also imperative that we continue to pursue the international economic programs which are directed toward a more prosperous and more peaceful world. Many phases of national economic policy are involved in these tasks. In previous Economic Reports I have set forth in detail how we may build upon existing programs to maintain the stability and enlarge the strength of the American economy as part of a strong world economy. Some of these programs now need to be reshaped or retarded in view of the greater urgency of military undertakings. But the continuing importance of many of these programs should not be lost through concentration solely upon the military situation The Responsibilities of Individuals The changes in national economic policy which I am recommending at this time are based upon the proposition that we must look also to individual and voluntary adjustments within our free economy to see us safely through the type of economic situation which is now unfolding. If conditions do not change very materially we should continue to place large reliance upon these voluntary adjustments Our growing productive strength as I have pointed out in earlier Economic Reports depends largely upon business policies. It depends upon judicious enlargement of capacity and investment to make full use of a growing labor force and an expanding technology. It depends upon pointing production along those lines which are most needed under changing circumstances. It depends upon price and income practices which maintain a balance between full output and buying power so as to avoid either inflation or deflation The course of business policies during the five years since World War II has in the main been an encouraging example of sensible adjustment to new problems as they arise. That is one very important reason why we now stand at unprecedented peaks of production employment and general prosperity. Further careful adjustment of capacity and investment to current and foreseeable conditions combined with restrained pricing and other market adjustments can give us the volume and kinds of production which the Nation needs. This is more essential now than ever before The expansion of certain types of production which is now doubly urgent because of international tensions should not be held back by fears that capacity would become excessive for peacetime use if international tensions should subside. The experience of the last five years has indicated that our domestic markets and the consumption requirements of our people are plentiful and growing. The facilities of most of our great industries are interchangeably useful for an expanding peacetime economy or for an expanding military force. Our obligation to resist aggression is no clearer than our obligation to maintain full prosperity at home when peace is made secure. With a growing population and working force this full prosperity will absorb an ever-increasing output. The intelligent course for business now in its own interests as well as those of the country is to remember these long-range prospects even as it adjusts to shorter range developments Labor also has great responsibilities rising in proportion to its increasing strength and influence upon the course of the whole economy. Labor should continue and enlarge its contribution toward increasing productivity and toward even more effective use of manpower. Wage demands of a character which might lead to another inflationary spiral should be avoided Above all labor should join with management in the further consolidation of industrial peace. Work stoppages in vital industries are something we simply can not afford under current conditions Every person in the United States is a consumer. The buying practices of the general public will be an important influence upon the economy under conditions which are now developing. The best rule to follow is to buy normally. The current outlook is that serious shortages of consumer goods will not develop unless they are created artificially by speculative or panicky acquisition of goods far in excess of actual need. This rule applies to business buying as well. Those of us who are not now called upon to make great sacrifices should certainly in justice to those in the armed services refrain from hoarding or avarice We can not now take action against all the contingencies of the future But if we deal promptly and realistically with the problems of the present the foundations will be firmly established for meeting new problems as they arise Working cooperatively together through their free enterprise system and their Government the American people have won a great war and established a unique prosperity Our task now is to help to restore and maintain the peace of the world and to protect and advance our economic strength. These two purposes are inseparable We have achieved unity in our policies to resist foreign aggression. We must seek and achieve the same unity in economic policies which will enable us to make that resistance successful as rapidly as possible. All else must yield to this controlling consideration in the minds and hearts of the freedom-loving people of the United States Summary of Legislative Recommendations On account of the cost of expanding our military strength and to help contain inflationary pressures an interim revenue measure should be enacted immediately to yield substantial additional revenue in the current fiscal year. The tax bill now pending should be revised as follows : ( a ) All excise tax reductions and other revenue-losing provisions should be eliminated but the loophole closing the dividend withholding and the life insurance company provisions should be retained ; ( b ) The revised corporate income tax rate structure contained in the pending bill should be adjusted to provide an increase in the normal tax rate from to percent ; taking into account the percent surtax this would increase the tax rate on corporate income in excess of $ to percent beginning with the year ; ( c ) Individual income tax rates should be increased to the " tentative " levels adopted in by removing the reductions from those levels made in and This increase should be effective beginning with one-quarter of incomes and would require an increase in the withholding rate from to percent beginning with the last quarter of As a safeguard against inflationary buying and to reduce the demand for scarce materials authority should be granted to regulate consumer credit to restrain mortgage credit particularly for housing and to limit speculation in commodities In view of the mounting shortage of some commodities required for the national defense authority should be granted for priorities and allocations of these commodities for the limitation of nonessential uses for the prevention of inventory hoarding and for the requisitioning of supplies To expedite the production of certain commodities needed for the military and for adequate stockpiling and to guard against a dangerous shortage of these materials in the event of any emergency calling for further expansion of our military efforts a program should be adopted which provides loans and incentives for the expansion of capacity for technological developments and for the production of essential supplies Summary of Economic Developments in First Half of The first half of brought recovery from the mild recession of and a rapid approach to new peaks of postwar prosperity. But at midyear it became clear that further substantial increases in output particularly in some lines will be needed to meet the enlarged needs resulting from the international situation Civilian employment in June of this year was million about million higher than a year earlier and slightly higher than in any previous June. Nonagricultural employment was million higher than in June while farm employment decreased. From May to June employment increased by about % million Unemployment after reaching a postwar peak of million in February was reduced to million or percent of the civilian labor force in June. A year earlier it was percent of the labor force ; in February of this year percent. Unemployment at much higher rates persists in some localities but is being reduced Total production of all goods and services rose to an all-time high annual rate of about billion dollars in the second quarter of this year compared with about billion in the lowest quarter of the recession and with the peak rate of billion in the fourth quarter of These comparisons are in constant dollars ( prices ) and are also adjusted for seasonal variation. The industrial production index of in June also exceeded the previous postwar peak reached in late and was percent higher than in June Manufacture of steel and automobiles and construction activity are now at new highs. The agricultural output however is expected to be slightly lower than in Productivity per man-hour in manufacturing according to some recent estimates appears now to be rising at an annual rate of about percent Output per farm worker during was about percent higher than during Prices moved moderately upward during the first half of with sharp rises in a few commodities in short supply. Wholesale prices rose percent and in June were percent above the June level but still percent below the postwar peak. The largest advances were in wholesale farm and food prices. The rise in industrial prices was less pronounced except for a steady advance in building materials and sharp rises in some metals and in rubber. Consumer prices rose percent dur- ing the half-year with very sharp increases in the last two months. In June they were slightly higher than a year earlier and percent below their postwar peak Since the events in Korea there has been a marked rise in prices covering a wide range of commodities. In major part this has been due to accelerated business and consumer buying to speculation created by exaggerated fears of shortages and to the ability to raise prices in such an atmosphere In the farm field seasonal declines in the supply of livestock and the substantial reduction in cotton acreage have been strong contributing factors The Bureau of Labor Statistics spot index for commodities has risen percent in the four weeks since the Korean outbreak while the weekly index of all wholesale prices has risen percent Wage and salary payments rose during the first half of to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter oi the year about billion dollars higher than a year earlier and about billion higher than in the first quarter of Rising employment and higher wage rates both influenced this trend. Manufacturing wage rates reached a new high of $ an hour in June. Private pension plans continued their rapid spread Work stoppages caused the loss of twice as much work time in the first five months of as in the same period of Conclusion of agreements in the bituminous coal industry and with the Chrysler Corporation ended the two principal work stoppages of the half-year. In May the outlook for industrial peace was brightened by the highly significant five-year contract between the General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers Profits have risen since In the second quarter of corporate profits before taxes were running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars percent higher than a year earlier. The level of profits after taxes permitted substantial increase of liquid assets despite higher dividends and a higher level of plant and equipment financing Farm income ( realized net income of farm operators ) at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter of was percent below that of a year earlier Credit expansion associated with the recovery of business since the latter part of proceeded rapidly during the first half of this year closely paralleling the expansionary pattern of This expansion has reflected very active demand for consumer durables and housing with the stimulus of easier terms and also increased financing of purchases of securities Consumer instalment credit has been rising constantly and at the end of June reached a total of billion dollars billion dollars higher than a year earlier Personal income in the second quarter of was at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars an increase of about percent from the fourth quarter of The distribution of veterans ' insurance dividends made total personal income slightly higher in the first quarter of than in the second. But all the major components of earned income except farm income and rental income were higher in the second quarter Personal consumption expenditures of billion dollars in the second quarter of were percent higher than in the fourth quarter of adjusted for seasonal variation. The proportion of personal consumption expenditures devoted to durable goods in the first half of was the highest on record Personal net saving rose from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter of to billion in the first quarter of and declined to billion in the second quarter. These unusual changes reflected the disposition of veterans ' insurance dividends received mainly in the first quarter. Personal debt has been rising faster than personal income since Private domestic investment in the second quarter of was proceeding at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars less than billion below the all-time peak of the fourth quarter of and nearly billion above the recession low reached in the fourth quarter of Outlays for construction and equipment have been rising since the summer of and by the second quarter of were well in excess of those of any previous quarter in history. Inventory accumulation was resumed early in the year and during the second quarter was proceeding at a substantial rate Construction activity rose to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in June a peacetime high. Rising costs of materials and labor evidenced some strain on the capacity of the building industry The increase of percent in private construction from the first half of to the first half of was due to the unprecedented volume of residential building. Most other types of private construction were less active than last year though contracts for commercial and industrial building have been increasing in recent months. Public construction in the first half of was substantially above the level of a year earlier Corporate financial requirements during the first half of were much higher than a year earlier primarily on account of the resumption of inventory expansion. Higher profits however have enabled corporations as a group during the first half of to maintain a highly liquid position The export surplus ( the excess of our exports of goods and services over our imports ) in the first half of was running at a rate of to billion dollars a year less than in the first half of Imports after some decline recovered and reached a higher level. Exports were considerably lower than a year before and now are almost down to the prewar relationship to gross national product. Nearly all major export commodities have shown a decline with cotton an important exception. Factors underlying the decline of exports and of the export surplus have been the increased foreign restrictions against use of dollars in payment for imports the devaluation of foreign cur- rencies and perhaps most basically the increased foreign production which enabled those countries to get along with less imports from the United States Government fiscal transactions in the first half of were considerably influenced by the veterans ' insurance dividend distribution. At seasonally adjusted annual rates. Federal cash receipts in the first half of were billion dollars and cash payments billion resulting in a cash deficit at an annual rate of nearly billion dollars. State and local fiscal operations during the half year showed a continued deficit at an annual rate of about billion dollars Excluding the veterans ' dividend distribution. Federal cash payments during the first half of were about % billion dollars below receipts on a seasonally adjusted basis and were about billion below the level of payments in the first half of This drop reflected chiefly lags in expenditures for international and defense programs and somewhat reduced outlays for farm price supports. These developments in the consolidated cash statement of Federal fiscal transactions have been paralleled by developments in the conventional budget HARRY S. TRUMAN JULY The Economic Situation at Midyear A Report to the President By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D. C. July The PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report, The Economic Situation at Midyear in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully jZe ^ x ^ f ^ Chairman /W Contents Page I. FIVE YEARS IN RETROSPECT Five phases of postwar economic development The transitional phase : from the war 's end to early The expansion phase : from early to late The climax of inflation : from late to beginning of The recessionary phase : the first seven months of The process of recovery : since mid-1949 What we have learned from the record II. THE PROBLEMS AHEAD The economic impact of international developments The tasks of private adjustment The range of public policy III. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FIRST HALF OF The course of employment and production Employment Unemployment Production Relation between production and employment Prices wages and profits Prices Wages and related matters Profits Money and credit The flow of goods and purchasing power Personal income consumption expenditures and saving Business investment and finance International transactions Government transactions Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget APPENDIXES A. THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION AND PURCHASING POWER T HE recent international developments require us to take stock of our economic position. This we propose to do in three parts : ( ) A general interpretation of the economic events of the past five years and of their current significance ; ( ) an analysis of problems ahead and of desirable policies ; and ( ) a detailed description of economic trends during the first half of I. Five Years in Retrospect The need for an interpretive review of the past five years is enhanced rather than reduced by the foreign situation. The variety of problems which the economy has faced since VJ-day has been so broad and the adjustments which have been made to these problems have been so significant that they provide an excellent starting point for an appraisal of the existing situation and of desirable economic policy This is true because during these five years the United States economy has been tested by the difficulties of reconversion inflation and recession. It has surmounted these tests with relatively small hardships measured by earlier history. There are now new problems confronting us. But the ability already displayed to cope with the various situations which have arisen since VJ-day should provide us with a practical understanding of the present and a good measure of guidance and confidence for the future Most indicators reveal the highest levels of peacetime prosperity yet achieved. Civilian employment reached almost ^ million in June. The pulse of activity is strong in almost every important sector. Measured in prices our total output of goods and services was running at an annual rate of about billion dollars ( billion in current prices ) for the second quarter of This contrasts with an annual rate ( also in prices ) of about billion in about billion in about billion in the lowest quarter of the recession and about billion in the previous peak reached in the fourth quarter of Even more important is the prospect that we shall move considerably higher in production and employment during the remainder of the year. This was in prospect even before the new international developments late in June The unusual speed and scope of the recovery from the recession of rounds out an extensive series of business changes since the war in an economy vastly different not only in size but also in character from prewar The economist is now challenged to make a fresh analysis trained not upon the prewar situation but rather upon a postwar economy which has expanded far above prewar levels and which has been altered in many respects by changes in structure and in business policies as well as by the legislative programs of the 's and by the fiscal policies of the postwar period It is true that the experience during these five years was not a complete test of our capacity to maintain maximum production without inflation or to avoid deep or prolonged downturns of business activity. Some temporary factors carrying over from the war were still available last year to provide some elements of strength which may not be present in the years ahead. The time may come although it is not immediately in prospect when we shall be put to a more searching test than in of our ability to substitute new factors of demand when older ones disappear or diminish Should these circumstances arise they may require more extensive business adjustments and a different interplay of public policies than those which proved so effective in Nor was the inflationary danger of which we surmounted as great as might arise in the future. Nonetheless the experience between and was of vital significance. During those years we went through a range of events which would probably have been burdensome enough to generate serious and extensive economic troubles under earlier circumstances. The difficulties presented by that particular range of events have thus far been overcome successfully. This demonstrates that our economy has far greater elements of stability and strength than most people had supposed. We must build upon that strength Further the current period is sufficiently remote from World War II to release us from most of the dangers to the economy which are inherent in a postwar readjustment. The high and increasing level of general prosperity which we enjoyed during the first half of this year on a fairly stable basis should now be placed in a new frame of reference and associated with a new set of data and problems. If that prosperity is menaced in the future it will be less in consequence of some lingering problems of the past five years than in consequence of new developments with which we shall have to deal as they arise. This is strikingly true of the near future in the face of an economic situation altered by the recent turn of international developments A review of the problems which have been met and surmounted since the end of the war will set in perspective the extent to which the first half of prior to the Korean developments found us on much sounder economic ground than previously with much improved ability and therefore greatly enlarged confidence to deal with whatever problems may arise in the future. More specifically this review has a direct bearing upon the problems of the immediate future when concern about inflation is again entering the public mind and when the international situation necessitates a sharp increase in the output of some products FIVE PHASES OF POSTWAR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Within five years we have experienced five business phases which have been clearly defined. It will be profitable to examine each of these in some detail The transitional phase : from the war 's end to early The prevalent fear toward the war 's end was that a drastic reduction in public outlays plus the rapid demobilization of our armed forces would lead to heavy unemployment and business dislocation for a substantial period of time. Many estimates of potential unemployment ran as high as million This crisis did not materialize. True by early industrial production had declined more than percent from the May level and employment in manufacturing had decreased more than percent. Unemployment rose from about one-half million on VE-day to about million in February But by the end of the first quarter of the posthostilities decline was concluded The main reasons for the mitigation of demobilization dislocation resided both in public policy and in private action. On the public side much legislation was enacted to speed industries through the recovery process and to make sure that they had ample funds for the work to be done. The payment of discharge allowances to veterans placed funds in the hands of those consumers who would most quickly spend them for civilian goods Other programs were encouraging veterans by the hundreds of thousands to enter colleges and training schools ; this had the effect of holding them temporarily off the labor market Even with these public policies at work there could have been vast unemployment if industry had been unequal to the technical and managerial task of quick reconversion. But no such shortcoming appeared Instead business manifested great skill and celerity displaying a genius no less notable than that which had converted the country to the tasks of war. The relatively quick composition of differences between management and labor was another factor. The process of reconversion was stimulated by the confidence that the markets were waiting for the goods to flow There were vast reservoirs of funds in the hands of consumers and business to help maintain demand as war buying declined The great demand on the part of consumers and business for goods and services caused all producers to crowd the capacity of existing facilities Extra shifts of workmen brought about an increase in the number employed even before new capital investment was made feasible by increasing supplies of raw materials and building products The expansion phase : from early to late In this period the expansion of production employment and personal income surged strongly forward. Unemployment dropped below million. New capital investment began in earnest. The ending of price control in the second half of opened the way for a threatening cycle ? of increasing prices rising cost of living aggressive and successful demands for higher wages increasing costs of production and again a rise in prices But this process had little adverse effect upon production and consumption during which were dominated by accumulated consumer and business demand. The economy was carried to high prosperity levels and full employment by the end of By early it was obvious that we had entered into magnitudes of activity vastly higher than before the war. It soon became clear also that this was not purely a restocking boom. The high tempo of activity reflected profound changes throughout the entire economy in its industrial capacity and productive potential and in the size and distribution of currently earned national income In early however many analysts had become somewhat pessimistic They took the view that the growing volume of durable goods beginning to appear in the market would divert consumer buying from nondurables This view proved to underestimate the total situation. By this time foreign demand and the Government policy of assisting war-torn nations to rehabilitate their economies caused a tremendous increase of foreign buying in American markets. In the first half of our excess of exports of goods and services over imports mounted to an annual rate of billion dollars. Exports of agricultural products were especially large. When it became apparent that this export surplus could not be maintained indefinitely there were renewed declarations that a business slump was imminent But new factors of strength appeared within the domestic economy. As the export surplus declined rapidly toward the end of capital investment by business expanded home building increased and the economy continued to move forward The increase in business expenditures for new nonagricultural plant and equipment from an annual rate of billion dollars in the first quarter of to an annual rate of billion dollars in the final quarter of the year was in itself enough to counterbalance the decrease in the export surplus. This was due for the most part to the normal reaction of business managers to mounting profits and to the vision of a vast market demand buttressed by a great store of personal savings and by high and increasing personal income. Government policies gave support to the trend of capital investment. The management of the public debt was directed toward the stabilization of interest rates ^ with a view to maining a financial environment which would facilitate the great industrial capital expansion required in the postwar period Private residential construction accounted for about two-thirds of the increase of about billion dollars in total private investment in new construction from to The credit policies and programs of Government played an indispensable part in the expansion of the market demand for homes. This expansion depended upon low interest rates small or nominal down payments and long periods of amortization Without public assurances the policies of private investment institutions could not have been extended far enough to permit this type of financing The combined efforts of private enterprise and Government were sufficient to dissipate the danger of large-scale unemployment and business dislocation during the reconversion period. It remained to be seen whether they could be equally successful in dealing with the postwar inflation The climax of inflation : from late to beginning of Toward the latter part of the postwar investment programs of business were in full swing backed by ample funds and activated by the unexpected ease of reconversion. Characteristic of such periods business investment at first increased much more rapidly than the output of industry This rising investment in turn increased the spendable incomes of consumers. In addition wartime savings were still large. The international situation required a high level of public outlays. Some restraints upon buying were available but they were not adequate to deal with the mounting inflationary pressures Notwithstanding the jump in the demand for materials for home building and other construction and for new equipment as well as an increase in personal consumption expenditures and employment there was very little enlargement of industrial production from the first half of to the second half. At the same time a short supply of some important farm products at home and abroad contributed to the excess of total demand over total supply. This situation was conducive to rapid price increases which began in July. Between June and December the index ( percent of the averages ) of wholesale prices of goods other than farm and food products rose from to The index for farm products rose from to with parallel increases in the price of food products. Wage increases added to the pressure on costs and prices In the third quarter of the year business loans increased rapidly and bank deposits were correspondingly expanded By midyear wholesale prices had risen longer and further than they did after World War I. When prices continued to rise at an accelerated rate during the second half of the year there was increasing concern. It was felt that the longer prices rose the more serious would be the ultimate reversal in business conditions. Many programs to forestall another disastrous depression had been established during the 19305s. But they had not been tested. No one could be sure that they would be effective in controlling a downward trend in a more dynamic economy which had been carried so far into inflationary dangers A first test although not a complete one of these anti-deflationary programs came early in Speculation in the grain markets had continued to drive grain prices upward until the middle of January After a period of two weeks in which quotations softened the bottom dropped out of the market in much the same manner as in and the stage seemed to be set for a catastrophic decline in agricultural prices similar to that which in had ushered in a serious postwar depression Two Government policies prevented a repetition of the collapse of agricultural markets. Most immediate was a limited control of trading practices in commodity markets under which changes in prices in a single trading session were held to a narrow range cents per bushel in the case of wheat. For several successive trading sessions the price of wheat dropped the limit and on February reached a level cents per bushel below the price a month earlier. This restrictive rule prevented a mass attack upon the market however and it forestalled utter demoralization Before farm income was significantly affected the influence of a more important program that to support farm prices halted the market break The farm price support program was valuable in stopping the drop in farm prices before any great damage had been done. It was even more important in preventing fear in the business world generally that an agricultural collapse was in the making which would be the prelude to a general deflation. For the business world had good cause to believe that would not repeat itself in a collapse of agricultural income. It was known that long before farm income dropped to a point where the farmer would cease to be an important factor in the demand for manufactured and other goods the program of supporting farm prices near a parity level would come into action These factors go far to explain why there was no break in industrial production or employment. Some industrial prices continued upward even while farm prices were falling. New business investment plans were carried through. There were no general declines in wholesale or retail price levels except in the case of farm and food products and these quickly rallied. Industrial prices and profits continued to rise. New capital investment was expanding following two years of heavy investment in enlarging productive facilities. Government expenditures were increasing because of the foreign situation. Nonagricultural employment was increasing and unemployment in the second half of was as low as it had been in any corresponding period since the war. National income was establishing a new record in each successive quarter of the year. The total disposable income of consumers also rose steadily in buying power as well as in dollars All these increases in demand were occurring during a period when some bottlenecks in the productive process had not yet been broken. The effect of large investment upon production had not yet made itself felt In fact during the last nine months of industrial production increased very little In late and during there were efforts to obtain a comprehensive program to deal with inflation. But these efforts were not successful and the inflation ran its course although it was modified by the Government surplus and debt-retirement policy In this quick survey of the inflationary movement it is important to recall that there were some curbs upon the boom although they did not prove to be sufficient. Even at the peak speculation and business excesses were not comparable to those of earlier periods. Self-restraint was manifest in many quarters. Moreover the banking and credit structure changed in significant respects did not fan the fires as in the late 's. The Government had some powers which were used to dampen buying and credit. This composite of private and public policies prevented the situation from getting out of hand. It helped to make the recession more controllable when it came The recessionary phase : the first seven months of The central cause for the recession was to be found in the unwillingness or inability of buyers of all types to absorb at current high prices the full product at full employment of a highly productive industry and a flourishing agriculture. That is probably a characteristic of almost all recessionary movements. This condition had first manifested itself as at earlier times in the agricultural sector. The great improvement in agricultural production at home and abroad led to a decline in farm prices. The index of prices received by farmers ( percent of the average ) had undergone a fairly unbroken decline from in mid-July of to in mid-February of The effect upon wholesale food prices was only slightly delayed and their course paralleled that of farm prices. Retail prices responded more slowly. But the decline in retail food prices brought the forward movement of the consumers ' price index to a halt in September and this index declined during the last quarter of the year despite a continued advance in prices of other consumer goods and services However the farm situation while a contributory factor would probably alone not have brought on the general recession. There were more important developments in the relationship between the general price level for almost all types of goods and services and the incomes and buying habits of consumers. Personal consumption expenditures dropped in the fourth quarter of In the meantime it became apparent that output was going to increase if full employment were maintained. This trend combined with the increasing price consciousness of consumers altered the outlook of business regarding the supportability of maximum output and employment at the current price structure For nearly three years merchants had been building up their inventories as rapidly as goods became available because they were confident that they could rely upon maintenance of the existing market demand and perhaps upon some further expansion even at increasing prices. Toward the end of when that confidence was shaken merchants began to reduce their orders for new goods to prevent further accumulation of inventories as expansion of sales became dubious and as price declines seemed in the offing Industrial production reached a postwar peak of ( percent of the average seasonally adjusted ) in October and was still above in January Operating plans of industrial managers then began to show the effect of the unplanned accumulation of inventories in the plants of manufacturers. Production was cut back moderately in February and then much more rapidly. It became increasingly clear that a definite break in the inflationary movement had developed and that the change was not merely a hesitation in the course of expanding business such as had occurred in the first quarter of the preceding year. In each of four successive months beginning with March the industrial production index dropped points. In July partly due to vacations the decline was points carrying the index down to The drop of points from November to July was more than percent wiping out the entire increase in the index of industrial production since the spring of The effect of the decline in industrial production was augmented because the relationship of prices to the income structure and some anticipation of price declines had led even earlier to a pronounced shift in private construction. The record level of new housing starts in the first half of maintained expenditures during the second half well above those of the same period in the preceding year. But the trend was reversing. In the number of housing starts climbed each month until a peak was reached in October and expenditures for private construction increased each month from May until November. After May there was a continuous decline in the number of new housing starts. Expenditures for private construction fell slowly but constantly after August Nonagricultural employment which was million higher in December than the average for the first half of that year declined million from December to February while the labor force declined only million. There was also a seasonal decline in agricultural employment so that unemployment increased in the two months from million to million. The subsequent seasonal increase in agricultural employment in the spring was not large enough to offset the growth in the labor force and the further moderate decline in nonagricultural employment. In June there were million unemployed and in July the number mounted to million The importance of the changes in inventories during the period under consideration has caused many to refer to the business recession of as an " inventory recession. " It is true that much of the decline which took place could be traced to and connected with this sector of the economy It is also true that when inventories had fallen considerably below the requirements of the current level of business activity a process of inventory rebuilding attended the upturn. But it is characteristic for inventory changes to appear early in recessions. The extent to which the general decline proceeds is determined by how far " inventory adjustments " are accompanied and followed by more fundamental drops in industrial production employment prices capital investment and national income These more fundamental factors dropped only slightly in the recession To say that they did not drop further because it was merely an " inventory recession3 ' confuses a description of what happened with an explanation of events. An important reason why the decline did not go further was that there were new factors in the business structure and in the programs and policies of Government. It is debatable whether these new factors and programs would have been sufficient under different circumstances ; but they were sufficient under the conditions of The process of recovery : since mid-1949 The recessionary movement had become formidable during May and June of This confronted the Council of Economic Advisers with the difficult task of advising whether or not drastic measures should be proposed in connection with the Midyear Economic Report of the President In its own Midyear Economic Review, the Council said that industrial production would drop and unemployment would rise further in July. The previous record of business cycles offered much evidence that revival would not set in prior to a sharp drop in industrial prices and in June these prices had fallen less than percent from their inflationary peak. Nonetheless the Council upon analysis of the whole situation felt that drastic measures were not needed. We felt that the recessionary movement was even then being brought to a halt Manufacturers had not been content to cut back production enough to balance it against new orders. They had reduced operations sufficiently to permit a reduction in their inventories each month even while consumer buying continued at high levels. By midyear it seemed clear that the fundamental factors of demand were strong enough to stimulate a rapid increase in industrial output The optimism of the Council at that time rested upon analysis of a postwar economy differing considerably from any in which the characteristics and events of business cycles had been previously studied. The war years had lifted national income and personal income far above old levels ; moved employment into a range which was called fantastic when first prophesied ; established vast funds of liquid savings in the hands of consumers and businessmen ; created an enormous public debt ; and left problems of national security of obligations to veterans and of aid to foreign nations which multiplied the peacetime expenditures of Government. Added to these factors there was a wide range of anti-deflationary programs which the Government had established following the catastrophic deflation of It was felt that this combination of forces would quickly activate a strong recovery if supplemented by business confidence and some further moderate adjustments in business policy Thus it was that the Council 's emphasis in midyear converged upon the factor of business confidence. New capital investment in building construction and in producers ' equipment had always been extremely volatile because plans for investment are largely determined by expectations with respect to future markets and future profits. Plans can change CHART ECONOMIC INDICATORS CHANGES FROM A YEAR AGO PERCENTAGE CHANGE PERCENTAGE CHANGE EMPLOYMENT m zm H TOTAL CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT fo'&vj K'-V-l'-V-J l ; : # : ; : : r. : rr-J H NONAGRI CULTURAL EMPLOYMENT M MANU FACTURING EMP LOYMENT CONTRACT CONSTRUCTION EMPLOYMENT ' ' ' : ' : vX< ; V''i f. \ V- : -.V AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT UNEMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION 5X / f f GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT PRICESlJ/ i,ca/_ ^ " ^ * \ INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION TOTAL PRIVATE PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION- ^ CONSTRUCTION- ^ PRODUCERS ' PLANT AND EQUIPMENT EXPENDITURES ( NONFARM ) ^ PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION INCOME " NATIONAL INCOME / COMPENSATION OF EMPLOYEES 2/ PERSONAL DISPOSABLE INCOME J/ WEEKLY EARNINGS ( MANUFACTURING ) IliJ l lll Ii I HI I I IIIIIIHIII CORPORATE PROFITS AFTER TAXES J ^ / FARM PROPRIETORS ' INCOME I/ PRICES ^ FARM PRODUCTS PH _ E18 p ! 3J ALL COMMODITIES DS INDUSTRIAL ALL ( OTHER THAN FARM ITEMS PRODUCTS AND FOODS ) WHOLESALE FOOD CONSUMERS ' SOURCE : APPENDIX B RENT APPAREL J/ CHANGES FROM SECOND QUARTER TO SECOND QUARTER FROM JUNE TO JUNE HUH * * ALL OTHER CHANGES ARE quickly when expectations change. Pessimism in the business world can go far toward vindicating itself by inducing a contraction in new investment which forces the business slump which is feared. Optimism in the face of declining business if it leads to continuance of new investment at a high level may permit a market adjustment to be worked out while the basic economic factors of consumer income and buying power are but little impaired. Such optimism may thereby justify itself Considerable optimism when business activity is declining has not been unusual at the beginning of a recession. Emphatic assurances that a break in a business boom could not become a depression because fundamental factors in the economy were strong have often been given by national leaders and by business experts. But seldom if ever before has that business optimism which demonstrates itself in sustained new longterm investment survived a decline in industrial production as great as that which took place in the first half of While business investment was indeed retarded during the recession the degree of confidence and strength manifested throughout the first half of was encouraging. Private construction expenditures during this period were at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion in the first half of and billion in the first half of The usual seasonal pattern was followed and in each month after the low in February there was an increase in construction expenditures. This was also true of residential construction which accounted for about one-half of the new construction. Even more remarkable was the high expenditure though at a reduced rate for new plant and equipment. This meant further extension of productive capacity following three years of almost feverish activity for that purpose. These business expenditures in the first half of had exceeded those for the same period in This led the Council of Economic Advisers to conclude that business optimism would survive the further slackening of industrial activity in July and would permit the seasonal elements of economic expansion in the late summer to act upon an economy which had not suffered further deterioration The reaction to price adjustments was also reassuring. Business in the main did not take these adjustments as a bad omen but instead recognized that they were laying the foundation for a resumption of economic growth. Price declines are always to a degree depressing because they cause losses on current stocks and hesitancy about future buying. One of the most delicate of all economic operations is to achieve price reductions sufficient to reactivate buying without letting price deflation go far enough to undermine morale disorganize business relationships and generate a panic. That this delicate operation was so effectively consummated during and through myriads of business decisions was a heartening demonstration of the application of improved economic knowledge to the practical realities of business life Most important of all the recession of prices and some cutting down of business plans did not generate a general decline in the incomes of the great body of the buying public. It is when prices and incomes chase each other downward that the spiral of depression is irrevocably under way Businessmen in made great efforts to hold lay-offs to a minimum and wage cuts were rare. This helped to maintain purchasing power Furthermore the whole income structure was strong because of wide improvements in private and public policy, adopted over the years including collective bargaining minimum wage laws and old age and unemployment benefits. There were also payments to veterans. Government expenditures much greater than before the warj contributed to the maintenance of income and demand High income levels and large market demand on the part of consumers are the foundation of economic strength and furnish an important impetus to business investment. This consumer strength usually impaired but little in the first months of a business reversal did not become enfeebled later on in by developments which in earlier periods had transformed an economic adjustment into a disaster. Personal income in the second quarter of was only percent below that in the final quarter of and personal consumption expenditures had fallen by less than percent Other programs also cushioned the shock. The farm price support program forestalled any collapse of agriculture such as destroyed the market demand of farmers in and in the years after The regulation of security exchanges and of the issue of securities prevented the building up of a speculative structure as in the twenties. Monetary and credit policies supplementing the sound banking structure of the Federal Reserve System maintained abundant and cheap credit protected debtors from the dangers attending maturing debt in periods of business stress and prevented financial crises such as those which ushered in earlier depressions General fiscal policy was also an important factor toward inducing the recovery. When business declined the tax system operated automatically to reduce revenues. Certain programs such as unemployment insurance increased payments to the public. These " built-in " stabilizing factors contributed to the budget deficit but they also contributed to business revival The recovery phase began in August The trend of several business indexes was not changed for a number of months but the shift from contraction to expansion was indubitable. Industrial production rose rapidly the index mounting from in July to in August. Employment in manufacturing increased by thousand or more than percent. Unemployment which had increased more than one million from April to July declined thousand. Expenditure for private construction continued its upward movement and new housing starts which had been maintained at the high level reached in May began a new upward surge which in August almost reached and in September and October surpassed the highest pre- ceding level in the postwar period. The sale of automobiles continued to expand The irregularity of business recovery alter a recession was heightened by serious industrial disputes during the autumn and winter months. Unemployment shifted up and down, and in the three winter months grew million to the disturbing level of million. But the recovery movement was strong enough to rebound after each setback and when the coal stoppage was concluded early in March progress became sustained and rapid By June the industrial production index had climbed to four points above the previous postwar peak private construction had far surpassed earlier levels nonagricultural employment was larger than in the same month in any preceding year unemployment had dropped to million business profits were increasing new investment by business was growing and the real incomes of consumers were increasing. All this was before the Korean development WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED FROM THE RECORD The first general conclusion which we can derive from the record of the past five years is this : our economy is far more resistant to shock than it was after World War I. It is better prepared to deal with inflationary or deflationary dangers. Those who point out the " exceptional " reasons for this overlook the fact that many of these " exceptional " items are just as integral a part of our economy today as the conditions which made for greater instability were an integral part of the economy of years ago For these new developments are not to be found simply in the larger magnitudes of the current economy. They reside in new patterns of business behavior and new programs of Government which have come successfully through hard tests There is need for further improvement but we can build confidently upon what we have thus far achieved. This leaves little room either for those extremists who would pillory business or for those who would hamstring effective public policy. The interplay of private and public action in overcoming the dangers of reconversion inflation and recession indicate conclusively that this interplay will continue to be necessary. It calls for ever-increasing understanding and cooperation. The domestic situation makes this desirable ; the world situation makes it imperative The second conclusion to be drawn from the record of the past five years i ? that the healthiest and safest condition for an economy such as ours is maximum utilization of our productive resources although the types of output and use may shift with changing needs. During the inflation of there were some who said that a lower level of total activity would provide a cure for the dangers of inflation. But when we entered upon that lower level of fundamental activity we felt even more insecure and yearned for the day when full production might be restored. It became abundantly apparent that this lowered level of activity did not add to the confidence of business the security of workers or the ease of solution of public problems On the contrary it made business less sure of itself labor more restive and the problems of Government more difficult. The American economy must make maximum utilization of its resources in order to thrive and to fulfill its inescapable domestic and world responsibilities It follows from this as a third cpnclusion to be drawn from the postwar period that we must draw a sharp distinction between the sound elements of maximum production and the unsound elements which threaten its maintenance. Inflation for example threatens the maintenance of full production. But it is no solution to overcome inflation by private or public policies which turn the whole economy downward. For this not only carries us into an even more difficult situation but also leaves us with the prospect of a restoration of inflationary trends as we shake off the recessionary threat and move vigorously upward again Despite the inflationary dangers which they may produce programs essential to our national security or general economic strength must be undertaken. For example we can not now refrain from very large expansion of military and related efforts although there is no practical way of undertaking this expansion without risking inflationary pressures This does not mean that inflation should be taken lightly. It erodes national strength by distorting the economy. The distribution of income and wealth is altered impairing the position of persons and institutions receiving relatively fixed incomes and owning assets of fixed money value Production is channeled into unsustainable patterns thus sowing the seeds of depression. Public morale is shaken. Confidence in the financial future may be impaired with serious implications for later periods of inflationary pressure For this reason we must seek by improved business practices and improved public policies to remove or contain the inflationary threats arising from necessary enlargement of essential national programs. If the expansion of these programs goes even beyond the amounts recently recommended for increased defense which an expanding economy should be able to absorb with rigorous fiscal and credit policies and limited controls it would then become necessary to consider even more drastic controls and even more substantial reductions of other programs The fourth conclusion to be drawn is that stability and economic strength are advanced by private and public policies which adjust themselves to our need and prospects for stable growth instead of adjusting themselves to the inevitability of the business cycle. If business in had assumed that a postwar depression was inevitable and had run for cover accordingly the protective curtailment of investment and employment would have accentuated the downturn. Instead while making some adjustments business kept its eyes riveted upon our prospects for national growth and the policies which it correspondingly adopted contributed mightily to the resumption of that growth. Similarly if the Government had reacted to the recession by excessive retrenchment policies these would have enlarged the downturn. Instead. the pursuit by the Government of a range of national policies necessary to our economic health and supportable by the resources of a full economy helped greatly to reverse the recessionary trend and to restore the trend toward maximum business activity and employment. Confidence is no substitute for sound policy. But sound policy must rest upon confidence commensurate with our natural resources our business equipment and skills and our uniquely proficient working population That confidence and that long-range viewpoint are essential now if we are to cope successfully with the problems raised by the Korean developments. These developments call for many changes in programs and in emphasis but the principle still stands. The targets for needed levels of production and employment required under the Employment Act of are not merely abstract aspirations. They can guide private and public economic policy along lines that will best serve our national needs Each of these conclusions has direct relevance to the current economic situation and to the emerging difficulties presented by international developments The Problems Ahead ERY recent events have placed international developments and their impact upon the domestic economy in the forefront of public attention. It is manifestly impossible to predict the future sequence of these developments. This makes it difficult to discern the appropriate economic policies which should now be followed. But the difficulty does not remove the necessity. The fact that our future programs may be largely influenced by the action of other nations does not force us to drift aimlessly The need for maintaining the American economy at maximum strength and productivity has become even greater than before. In domestic economic affairs no less than in international we must be prepared and watchful retaining enough flexibility to change our course quickly as conditions change V THE ECONOMIC IMPACT OF INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS The economic outlook at midyear before the Korean development was highly favorable. Production and employment had attained a new peacetime record level for the month of June. Despite attainment by the economy of levels above when inflationary conditions had become dangerous and were soon to lead to a recession there was no serious threat of inflation. Considering the pace of the business revival price rises in general had been moderate ; although certain markets such as those for nonferrous metals and building materials were under pressure because demand crowded supply. In wide areas of the economy some margin of unused productive capacity was still available. There had been very large new investment in productive plant and equipment which increased capacity substantially above that of The labor force had grown more rapidly than employment and despite the high level of employment in June there was a margin of between and million in the number of job seekers above a number which would represent a comfortable but not a tight labor situation. The prospect a month ago was that we could achieve maximum production and employment without inflation by the end of the year. This would have completed the business recovery and would have placed us in good position for healthy growth in the years ahead commensurate with normal increases in the labor force and constant improvement of technology At midyear however there occurred the outbreak of hostilities in Korea followed by the certainty that our military exertions and defense prepara tions will need to be increased greatly for a considerable period of time We can not yet judge the extent or duration of this new turn of evenU If other nations were to force this country into defense programs comparable to those of war a full war economy would then need to be established. If the Korean situation were to be followed by a situation of heightened and prolonged tension requiring that we be fully prepared for military effort at many points in the world the resulting increase in expenditures would require even more extensive economic controls than those thus far proposed The current request for an additional billion dollars for increasing our armed forces and our military outlays while very sizable does not involve full mobilization of our military might or the placement of our civilian economy on a full wartime footing. But the increasing preparations for defense which must now be made will have a very substantial effect upon the domestic economy even though not all of the additional appropriations will be expended this year. The stepping up of military procurement will cause further tightening of the market situation in important areas of the economy. There has been and will be some increased forward buying both by business and by consumers. There will be a larger demand for labor and a tendency toward wage increases of a magnitude which would increase the costs of production and add to the pressure on prices Such increased pressures superimposed upon an active economy could quickly create a sufficiently serious inflationary situation to require the whole gamut of comprehensive and direct controls if advance buying by business and consumers should approach the proportions of hoarding or rampant speculation or if prices and wages should commence to spiral. This would also follow if further changes in the international situation should require the stepping up of military efforts and procurement even more rapidly than has thus far been proposed. But if neither of these contingencies develops price wage and manpower controls should be avoidable. There is some margin of unused capacity in most industries even apart from the use of double shifts and overtime work and there is still a substantial reserve in the labor force. The utilization of these reserves plus some necessary capacity expansion should cover military needs on the present scale without a complete set of controls if production is effectively channeled into essential areas through material allocation and above all if total demand is held in check by strong tax and credit measures Output per man-hour was estimated to be about percent above the level in the first half of the year. This means an average gain of about percent per year ( compounded ) slightly higher than the average rate in the prewar decade. With vast recent improvements in plant technology and skills we should certainly be able to maintain at least the recent rate of increase in output per man-hour over the next few years Coupled with this productivity trend there is the certainty of a growing labor force. The labor force in fact is likely to increase more rapidly than is indicated by the size of the normal annual increment because many new workers are drawn into industry when the economy is working at high speed. Additional labor power is also available in the current body of million unemployed workers and among those who now work only parttime. While substantial numbers of men will be drawn into the armed forces it seems clear that the labor force will be large enough to permit sizable increases in civilian employment Without an unusual increase in the labor force or in hours of work maximum employment would involve by the end of an increase in our annual rate of total output of about billion dollars at present prices But our potential increase in production is considerably greater allowing for the further reduction of unemployment by to million for possible enlargement of the labor force for the possibility of full-time employment of many who are now employed only part-time and for the full use of existing plant capacities. In succeeding years we can expand about percent annually With this output potential the economy is in good shape to deal with increased programs of substantial scope. Nor does the fact that there is so much less slack in the economy than there was in mean that we are faced with unmanageable problems. It is true that additional procurement programs coming in a period of boom create greater problems of scarcity and inflationary pressures. But these problems can be dealt with more expeditiously than the time-consuming process of shifting an economy from low gear into high Now that we are in high gear however we must exert every effort to produce even more. Our economy is so flexible and its demands so varied that the increase of total production up to the limits of our resources will be the most effective general effort that we can make. The more we produce the more fully we can supply the most essential purposes without diversions which would impair other sectors of the economy But the increase of total production will not in itself be enough. The kind of situation in which we now find ourselves and the immediate outlook will impose concentrated strains upon some lines of supply much greater than the average strains upon the economy as a whole. The increased need for steel and other items entering into military and related uses will be relatively much greater than the increased demands upon the economy as a whole. And the increased need for these special products will converge largely upon areas where supply is already tight and the utilization of existing capacity complete or almost complete. This means that the expansion of production in these specific lines must take precedence over the expansion of other lines. This involves special problems of labor utilization as well as use of facilities and materials. It also means that in special lines expansion of total output probably can not proceed rapidly enough to avoid the necessity of some diversion from less essential use to the most essential use. It follows that policies directed toward the expansion of specific lines and toward influencing the composition of the demand for and the distribution of these products are likely to become just as urgent as policies to reduce the total level of demand to counteract general inflation. Both types of policies are now needed. This must be taken into account as we turn to a consideration of the private action and public policy called for by the existing situation THE TASKS OF PRIVATE ADJUSTMENT The business policies which have carried us through almost a year of production increases should with some adaptation be helpful in the treatment of the problems lying immediately ahead Since early the Council has urged that businessmen expand plant capacity and investment to meet the constantly expanding requirements of an economy operating at maximum production and employment. The extent to which this course has been pursued even under the threat of the recession contributed greatly to the speed and durability of the advance in output and employment. In many of the important sectors of the economy the recent upward revision of business investment intentions should not be reversed because of current developments. In some outstanding areas indeed further expansion has become a more crucial need There need be no fear that this enlarged productive capacity would become unusable if and when international tensions subside. With enlarged capacity available the great and growing domestic market for goods and services of all kinds should never reach the end of the road We are now too far from the termination of World War II to talk about postwar backlogs which will eventually be worked down except in a few areas. A very high and growing level of current demand should be regarded as a permanent feature of a 270-billion-dollar economy able to move forward at the rate of to billion dollars a year There are many illustrations of the fact that a level of demand which was regarded by many as " abnormal " in was below the level which should be regarded as normal and necessary for and in the years ahead Such is the dynamic quality of our economy. Some thought that the Nation 's steel production was above a sustainable level two years ago. Since then however the industry has substantially enlarged its capacity and is planning further enlargement. But even before the international events of last month the industry had been straining capacity despite incomplete recovery of the Nation from a business recession. Thus the further expansion of the steel industry would be good business even in an entirely peacetime context. The only effect of the present international situation is to make that expansion more urgent. To assume that this accelerated expansion should not be undertaken because it might exceed the need if international tensions should subside would neglect the vital need of today. It would be unrealistic when measured by the standards of desirable and attainable peacetime growth for the economy as a whole There are other situations where capacity has lagged behind the requirements of an expanding economy. Iron ore as well as nonferrous metals are examples. The increased demand which will be injected into the economy by enlarged defense expenditures will be superimposed upon a great civilian demand. If this increased demand imposes an excessive strain upon supply in important areas the most lasting solution will be for the supply to be increased. Business policy should take this into account Some situations will occur however where the alternative of reducing demand will be the only immediate solution The problem of pricing policy is accentuated by recent developments In most of the areas where prices have been rising further increases are not needed to provide the incentives for enlarging supply because profit rewards are now adequate. Restraint and moderation in pricing policy are vitally significant at this time when international uncertainties have already led to unwarranted price and inventory developments in some areas. Many of these areas are more or less subject to conscious price policy and businessmen have an opportunity to serve their country as well as themselves by extreme caution in pricing Another area in which business needs to exercise judgment and foresight is in the management of inventories. These in the main have been skillfully handled since the war. The accumulation of inventories since the beginning of the recovery movement has perhaps not been excessive in view of the depletion which previously occurred. But enormous damage could be done if businessmen now engaged in a speculative race for goods to avoid a feared shortage later on. If inventories are carefully managed a shortage later on should not occur for reasons which have already been advanced. But panicky action could produce an artificial shortage disorganize the markets cause substantial business losses in a speculative race and increase the pressure for more legislative curbs. It could also seriously impair essential Government programs It is also important that banks adjust their lending operations to the new military and economic situation. This will require selectivity of loan policy so that bank credit will be available for business expansion which is needed for industrial mobilization while bank credit for speculative uses and for nonessential purposes which compete with military programs for manpower and materials must be sharply restricted Wage policy is inseparably connected with price policy. The Council of Economic Advisers in January committed itself to the desirability of a wage-price policy which sought to stabilize prices and to gear wage increases to general advances in productivity. This policy which of course requires variations to cover differing individual situations has recently been endorsed by important business organizations. It has been incor- porated in the five-year contract of one of our largest industrial concerns and the union which represents its employees The possibility that strong and general inflationary impulses may develop within the economy calls for great moderation in the area of wages as well as prices. It is less important now to speculate whether wages chase prices or vice versa than it is to make sure that neither commences to chase the other. In considering wage policy it should be remembered that the only production which is available for civilian consumption is civilian production. To the extent that increased production is channeled into military purposes it can not be translated into civilian enjoyments. Labor also has an interest in helping the effort to train and channel workers into the most necessary jobs. The more extensively this is done on a voluntary basis the more feasible it will be to avoid manpower controls The opportunity is now afforded to consumers as such to make an affirmative contribution toward economic stability. The safest rule for consumers in their personal interests as well as that of the Nation is to follow their normal buying habits. A wild scramble to purchase durables or to build up an inordinate reserve supply of soft goods could turn a manageable economic situation into one of utmost gravity. The avoidance of this should be urged through every channel of popular communication Those who operate as producers and consumers throughout the vast and varied American economy are confronted with a responsibility somewhat different in degree but essentially the same in principle as that which they have met during the postwar years. It is the need for economic understanding mutual accommodation and concern for the national well-being There is no escape from the fact that in the final analysis the cost of national security must be borne by the people. The record throughout the trials of reconversion inflation and recession indicates that the American public can meet their new problems with equal or even greater success THE RANGE OF PUBLIC POLICY Public policy can not be adjusted simultaneously to each of the possible contingencies of the future particularly when so many of these are beyond the control of this Nation. An effort to do this would impair the effectiveness of current action directed to current problems. The degree of effectiveness demonstrated in adjusting what we do now to what is needed now will be the surest token that we can adjust later to whatever may be needed later on. The uncertainties of the future should not generate either paralysis or excessive action in the present We must maintain our domestic economy in a position to serve as a tower of strength for all the efforts of the Nation not only during an emergency of a few weeks or months but for years which may be many in number. The north Korean attack is a warning to the world to be prepared against the possibility of similar aggression at other points. The United States must be ready to bear its share of the burden of the common defense. The heavier defense expenditures which we are now undertaking will not end when the mandate of the United Nations has been enforced in Korea. We are striving to avoid a major war but there may be other alarms and possibly other attacks and we must be prepared to meet them no matter how long may be the period before full peace is established Economic policy must now be adjusted to the prospect of this long pull If the pull proves to be short we shall lose little by being prepared ; if it proves to be long we shall gain much. Our efforts now should be directed toward developing and maintaining maximum national economic power indefinitely This statement of basic principles prompts three broad conclusions regarding public policy in the light of the current situation : First these policies should be designed to bring about a quick increase in production. Such an increase is essential not only to supply our military requirements but also to meet the essential needs of our growing population Second public policies should ensure that defense requirements and essential civilian needs have priority over other uses. Hoarding must not be tolerated nor can we allow needed scarce materials to be used for nonessential purposes Third public policies should provide protection against the threat of a new inflation. An increase of billion dollars in military appropriations coming at a time when our economy is already operating at near-maximum levels will greatly increase demand for goods and for labor thus putting pressure on our price and wage structure. A sharp and continued rise in prices and wages at this time would not only impose hardships on domestic consumers ; it would weaken our whole economy and would impede our military effort In considering the economic effects of the proposed increases in defense expenditures in the setting of the current economy we find firm ground for believing that it will be possible to make and maintain substantial enlargements in these expenditures without resorting to all of the controls of a war economy. But we must take some important steps now The first and most important of these is to use fiscal and credit policies to the fullest extent feasible for the restraint of inflationary pressures. On the fiscal side this means that we should seek to reduce the size of the cash deficit substantially or better still to remove it entirely. For the maintenance of a large deficit creates and aggravates inflationary pressures in a time like this. The economy is strong enough to bear the burden of financing the needs which have now been outlined without deficit financing and extensive increases in the money supply Before the north Korean attack the domestic economy was moving into a range of national income which would have substantially enlarged budget receipts. The acceleration of economic activity resulting from the expansion of defense preparation is hurrying the enlargement of production and employment and accordingly the growth of tax revenues. The imperative need now is to provide additional sources of revenue to cover the new defense and related expenditures as rapidly as possible. Such a program will help to curb inflationary forces ( a ) by restricting the enlargement of the money supply and ( b ) by reducing the buying power of consumers and business In our judgment the economy is now strong enough to bear the burden of substantial increases in tax rates in accord with this principle and to do this without endangering the maintenance of maximum production. There are of course alternative sources from which this amount of revenue could be obtained but we can not urge too strongly that some combination of methods should be applied immediately toward this end. The program of other restraints now being recommended will prove woefully inadequate without a prompt and drastic increase in taxes The fiscal policies we have recommended would not sufficiently eliminate the inflationary threat. There would be delay in the increase of Federal tax collections and in the meantime Government spending would considerably exceed Treasury receipts. There is also the danger that consumers and businessmen may engage in panicky buying Further restraint upon civilian demand for goods should now be imposed through the control of consumer credit and through the tightening of credit for building construction. Administrative measures have been taken to tighten terms on residential loans insured guaranteed or made by the Government. Further legislation is needed to tighten both private and governmental lending policies. In addition further controls should be established over commodity speculation In addition to fiscal and credit policy it is important to recognize that pressures in specific areas will far exceed the pressures upon the economy generally. Shortages already exist with respect to some of the essential elements of a military program. The prices of some of these commodities have risen much more rapidly than average prices during the first half of this year and some price increases have been accelerated in recent weeks This requires a compulsory allocation program not only to assure adequate military supply but also to prevent price and cost increases in these limited areas from spreading outward through the whole economy. It will not be enough in this connection to establish a program which enables the military to procure promptly the materials which it needs. This alone would only aggravate competitive bidding by other users. The inevitable rise in prices would move into the costs of production of most producers of goods and services. The program should therefore provide for limitation of nonessential use. This would reduce the total demand to match the supply. There should also be the power to requisition hoarded or unnecessary supplies of these essential commodities and to prevent excessive inventory accumulation Careful analysis of available material requirements for the expanding defense effort indicates that some specific measures should now be taken to expand capacity and accelerate production as a supplement to allocation. We can not afford to be caught short of essential supplies. The experience during World War II developed a number of useful methods, such as loans guarantees and purchase contracts to expand capacity finance essential production and speed technological development We do not recommend the employment of general controls over prices and wages at this time. The productive potential of the nation has risen well above the level of two years ago. Business and labor have both had a bitter though brief taste of the consequences of inflation. and should profit by their added experiences as to how to ward it off. But the recent upsurge of prices and advanced buying indicates how quickly we can pass over into a dangerously inflationary situation. These tendencies if not promptly checked are sure to generate additional wage demands. The speed with which they can be checked depends not only upon private restraint but also upon much higher taxes vigorous restraint upon credit and a strong allocations program. These measures in our judgment should be undertaken at once. At the same time the appropriate agencies of Government should continue and intensify their development of plans for the utilization of more sweeping controls over the pricewage structure and over the utilization of manpower. These efforts should be brought at once to so high a stage of development that if the need becomes clear a request to and action by the Congress would enable their immediate application Other Government programs may here be mentioned briefly. Future developments beyond the control of this Nation might make it necessary to pare down or defer some of these domestic programs even more than is now being done. But we should bear in mind that some of these programs are affirmative reinforcements of our economic stability and growth and consequently of our military potential. The economic significance of these programs has been depicted fully in previous reviews It need not be reiterated in detail in this review which concentrates upon the significance of recent changes in the domestic and international situation One problem which does deserve renewed emphasis is that of dealing with such unemployment as may occur despite our best efforts to avoid it Even with unemployment further reduced those who are unemployed should not be left without the adequate protection that our Nation can so well afford. The first line of defense against hardships caused by unemployment is unemployment insurance. The test of revealed clearly that the Nation-wide system was deficient whether measured by extent of coverage or duration and size of benefits. Action is needed this year to improve the Federal-State unemployment insurance system along the lines recommended by the President. Without such action many of the State legislatures will probably not act in and considerable delay would then result in achieving these necessary improvements The Council of Economic Advisers has confined its proposals at this midyear to a relatively short list. We are mindful of the crowding of the congressional calendar with transcendently important issues of international policy. We have therefore thought it best at this stage to identify only those matters wThich appear to us to be of greatest urgency in the current situation. Our views on a broader range of programs inseparably connected with the stability and growth of the American economy have frequently been stated III. Economic Developments in the First Half of THE COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION HE FIRST HALF of brought large gains in employment and production. These gains have moved us much closer to maximum levels. But at midyear the development in Korea indicated the need for further increases in output T Employment In June of this year almost million persons held civilian jobs a new record for June The contrast with a year ago is impressive. From June to June the civilian labor force increased by almost million while unemployment decreased by about thousand. Nonagricultural employment expanded by million. Agricultural employment declined by thousand. Total civilian jobs increased by million. ( See chart ) The developments from May to June were significant. There was a net addition of more than million persons to the labor force. Unemployment however increased by only slightly more than thousand. Almost a million more persons found jobs in agriculture and about thousand more found work in nonagricultural lines Agricultural employment of million in the first half of was considerably below the same period of the years immediately preceding It was thousand below the first half of and thousand below the first half of In contrast there has been a notable upward trend in nonagricultural employment. The average of million for the first half of indicates a gain of million over the first half of and a gain of thousand over the first half of The increase in nonagricultural employment during the first half of has been steady since February with the improvement from May to June being particularly noteworthy. ( See appendix table B-9. ) Between January and June of this year total manufacturing employment increased by about thousand to million with almost all of the increase taking place in durable goods industries. Moderate increases occurred in contract construction which rose to million in June and in transportation trade and service. Changes from May to June of CHART LABOR FORCE Civilian employment reached an all-time June high of million in June I960. Nonagricultural employment was million higher than in June while agricultural employment was thousand lower MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J I960 Unemployment reached in February a postwar peak of million or percent of the civilian labor force By June it was reduced to million or percent of the civilian labor force PERCENT PERCENT UNEMPLOYMENT AS PERCENT OF CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE J tantf F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A J J * I4 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : M DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE A S O N D J F M A I960 M J indicate that durable goods manufacturing and construction showed the most important increases in employment. ( See appendix table B-10. ) Unemployment The favorable upward trend in employment has been accompanied by a favorable downward trend in unemployment. After reaching a postwar peak of almost million in February of this year unemployment dropped by about half a million in each of the three succeeding months to a level of about million in May. In June it rose to million but this increase was less than seasonal. Unemployment now represents about percent of the civilian labor force compared with percent a year ago and with a postwar high of about percent in February of this year. ( See appendix table B-9. ) Currently in the United States ( including Hawaii ) there are major labor market areas and smaller labor market areas where unemployment is percent or more of the labor force. This is a decided improvement over April. In of these areas there is no indication of long-standing distress and there is reason to believe that continued improvement in national economic conditions will reduce the burden of unemployment In the other areas the problem of unemployment seems more chronic in character The incidence of unemployment has been relatively more severe during recent months for semiskilled workers and unskilled nonfarm laborers The highest rates have been as usual among workers under years of age both male and female. Much of the unemployment in this younger group results from frequent job changes as they are getting oriented in the labor force In June of this year the unemployment total of million included slightly under a million persons who had been unemployed and looking for work unsuccessfully for weeks or longer. This number which had been increasing steadily since the beginning of started dropping somewhat in May and June of this year. There was a slight reduction in June for the first time this year in the number of persons unemployed six months or longer ( estimated currently at thousand ) The duration of unemployment for those years and over is about double that for teenage youth Early in a large number of workers were exhausting their claims for unemployment compensation benefits prior to finding another job. During the first quarter of this happened to about thousand persons the highest number for any quarter since There has also been a sharp increase in the average monthly number of general assistance cases reported by the Social Security Administration from thousand for the first quarter of to thousand for the first quarter of The increase would have been even greater except that many unemployed persons can not qualify for public assistance because of the rigid means tests applied in many States There are slightly over a million persons who consider themselves fulltime workers but who are working on limited schedules because of slack work5 materials shortages and similar economic reasons. Most of these workers have the equivalent of a or 4-day workweek. This is about one-half million below a year ago. In addition there are about million persons who regularly work part time but who would prefer and could accept full-time work if such jobs were available Production The value of all goods and services produced in the second quarter of is estimated at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars This is percent higher than in the fourth quarter of and slightly above the peak reached in the fourth quarter of ( See appendix table B-l. ) Moreover with prices below the real output of the economy is now at a new record about percent above the fourth quarter of Even with normal conditions we would need an increase of about percent by the end of the year. The present international situation calls for a substantially greater increase Industrial production. The index of industrial production in June rose to a new postwar high of percent of the average. ( See chart ) This represented a gain of percent over June and percent over December. It exceeded by percent the previous postwar peak of reached in October-November The recovery in durable manufactures has been especially marked the June output being percent above December and about percent above the previous peak of October The most important changes in output since the lows are summarized in table ( For further details see appendix table B-l5. ) TABLE Changes in industrial production since lows Index ^ Item Low period of low June-July Industrial production : total Manufactures : total Durable goods Nondurable goods Minerals _ June Percent increase from low to June _ ._ June-July October3 June-July October Adjusted for seasonal variation The effects of plant-wide vacations in July mainly in nondurable lines are currently only partly allowed for in the seasonally adjusted index. In order not to overemphasize the usual July dip the average for June and July is used Production was reduced by work stoppages in October Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( see appendix table B-15 ) Private surveys suggest that industrial capacity has been expanding at the rate of at least percent a year while industrial output has barely surpassed the peak reached nearly two years ago. On this basis present CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION industrial production in June reached a new postwar high percent above the previous peak in October-November and percent above the level of June PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM capacity could without undue strain turn out something like percent more which would raise the index of industrial production to about In the present emergency industrial output could doubtless be raised more than this by overtime work and by using extra shifts. In some individual industries there is a considerable margin for expanding output ; in others little if any slack exists at present production rates. Larger capacity is needed not only to meet the current defense needs but to provide for the growing peacetime requirements of our expanding economy The changes in output have varied markedly from industry to industry due to a variety of causes. Work stoppages early in were largely responsible for a drop of points in the index of total industrial output Immediately after the settlement of the coal strike there was a sharp increase in the output of most durable goods. Since April the steel industry has been operating at or slightly above rated capacity which is more than percent above last year. Output of steel in May and June set new alltime records Automobile production continued to increase in the first half of and has been one of the major factors of strength in the economic situation In spite of a prolonged work stoppage in the Chrysler plants output in the first half of this year was more than percent higher than in the first half of Electric power production has shown steady expansion during the postwar period. The output of electric power in June of this year was about percent greater than in June Private construction outlays in June were percent above June and public construction increased percent in the same interval ( See appendix table B-16. ) The boom in construction has been a key factor in the recovery since mid-1949 Agricultural production. Present indications are that total farm production for sale and for farm home use in will be about percent below the levels. The July crop reports indicate a lower output of several major crops due partly to smaller acreages under the Federal allotments and partly to the fact that prospective crop yields are not up to last year 's high levels. In general the reductions that are now in sight apply to those crops which are in surplus especially cotton and grains. Food output is expected to be slightly larger than last year. The production of livestock and livestock products is increasing and further increases are expected in the second half of the year. The supplies of all foods and feeds are fully adequate to meet our needs for the coming year Relation between production and employment During recent years there has been a gradual reduction in the number of workers employed in agriculture without a corresponding decrease in farm output. ( See appendix tables B-9 and B-14. ) Year to year changes in farm production per worker are greatly affected by weather. But there is little doubt that productivity per worker has increased since prewar days. It is estimated that output per farm worker averaged percent higher during the period than during the period We should expect some further increase in agricultural output per man and possibly some further declines in agricultural employment levels Increases in labor productivity are now being widely reported. The amount of the over-all increase can not yet be statistically computed on a satisfactory basis. Nevertheless it seems certain that a net increase in productivity is occurring. The limited data that are available suggest that output per man-hour in manufacturing may be increasing in line with the long-run trend commonly estimated at about percent a year. In a majority of those industries where roughly comparable data are available output since midsummer has increased more than employment or man-hours. This reinforces the conclusion that with full utilization of manpower the total output of the economy can grow considerably in the months ahead without serious strain although there will be a tight situation in certain industries where plant capacity and the supply of raw materials are already under some pressure PRICES WAGES AND PROFITS Prices The rising tempo of business activity during the first half of exerted upward pressure on prices. The price increases prior to the Korean development were on the whole moderate. This is all the more significant since the economy within six months had moved rapidly from a condition with substantial slack to a level of activity close to conditions of maximum employment and production. Although the output of most industries during the first half of was adequate to meet current levels of demand shortages reappeared for a number of basic commodities particularly in some raw and semifinished materials and resulted in some sharp price increases. The rapid expansion of business gave prices a generally strong tone but there was reasonable expectation that improvement in supply would take place and that this would help to restrain prices Subsequent to the change in the international situation there has been a broad upward surge in prices The present pace of price increases largely reflect speculation and rumors about the impact of the stepped-up defense program upon supply as well as increased buying by business and consumers. This has created an atmosphere conducive to price increases Wholesale prices. Wholesale prices rose percent from December to June The June level was percent higher than a year earlier but was percent below the postwar peak. The largest advances were in wholesale farm and food prices. Industrial prices moved upward more moderately. However in the four weeks since Korea the BLS daily spot price index of commodities has risen percent. The more comprehensive weekly BLS index of wholesale prices has increased percent during the same period a rise almost as great as during the first six months of ( See chart table and appendix table B-22. ) Wholesale farm prices rose percent from December to June of this year but were still percent below a year earlier and percent below their postwar peak. Although prices paid by farmers also rose during this period the greater increase in prices received by farmers caused the parity ratio to rise moderately. In June the parity ratio was compared with in December The major rise in farm prices occurred during the second quarter of but particularly noteworthy was the fact that they rose also during the first quarter. There was no repetition of the sharp break in farm prices which had characterized the first quarters of and ( See appendix table B-23. ) The rise in farm prices during the first half of the year was due to a combination of factors. Since most basic crops during the second half of were generally at or below support prices this stimulated a heavy movement into the loan program thus reducing the free supply and strengthening prices. The planned curtailment of acreage for the basic crops and the sharp reduction in the prospective yield of winter wheat caused some further upward pressure CHART WHOLESALE PRICES Wholesale prices moved upward during the first half of The overall rise in industrial prices was moderate but there were sharp advances for some basic commodities. Farm and food prices rose more than industrial PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE FARM PRODUCTS ..OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL PRICES ) t ^ o M I iTi d iTi iTI o I960 PERCENTAGE CHANGES DECREASE POSTWAR PEAK TO JUNE ALL ITEMS FARM PRODUCTS OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR The increase in incomes and employment in the first half of expanded the demand for farm products. This was particularly true of meat and livestock. The market for choice grades of beef cattle was strong. Hog prices were weak during the first quarter of but rose sharply during the second quarter. Not all farm commodities participated in the price rise. Large seasonal increases in supply held down the prices of dairy products poultry and eggs during the first six months of Wholesale food prices rose percent from the last month of to June In June they were slightly lower than a year earlier and percent below their postwar peak. The major rise took place during the second quarter TABLE Changes in wholesale prices Percentage change Commodity group December June to December to June December to June AH oommnditifis Hides and leather products Textile products Fuel and lighting materials TVTfttals and mfital products Building materials _ _ Chemicals and allied products Housefurnishing goods _ Miscellaneous _ _ _ __ Special groups : Raw materials Semimanufactured articles Manufactured products Farm products Foods. _ Other than farm products and foods _ : Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table B-22. ) Since the recent change in the international situation wholesale farm prices have risen percent and food prices have gone up percent. The increase in farm prices is not quite as large as that which took place during the first six months of but the increase in food prices is greater. Farm and food prices are now at the highest levels since the beginning of A large part of these increases is due to the advances in livestock and wholesale meat prices which rose percent and percent respectively. Although we are now in the period when supply seasonally declines these increases are far greater than would appear to be warranted by seasonal factors particularly since prices of these products were high before the Korean development. Cotton and soybean prices also rose sharply as well as prices of fats and oils. The rise in cotton prices has been in part due to a substantial reduction in acreage and in part to speculation Industrial prices rose percent during the half year but in June they were percent below their postwar peak. During the first quarter these prices continued the over-all stability which had characterized them since last June. This over-all stability was however the composite of diverse movements. The prices of building materials were moving up. Later in the quarter textile prices began to decline while those of chemicals and some metals began to rise During the second quarter as demand continued to expand the general level of industrial prices rose moderately. The increases were particularly marked for such materials as nonferrous metals lumber scrap steel and rubber. Textile prices after some further decline began to move up in June. Chemical prices first showed strength and then declined mainly those of fats and oils The events in Korea have had a less pronounced effect thus far on the general level of industrial prices than on farm and food prices. Since that situation developed industrial prices have advanced about \ l/ % percent However individual commodities mainly raw and semifinished such as tin lead many textiles and chemicals have advanced very sharply The steady advance in the prices of building materials during the half year reflected the boom in residential construction. Building materials prices increased percent and are up percent from their August low. They have now virtually regained their postwar peak. There has been a very sharp rise in lumber prices and in June they hit a new postwar peak. Other prices showed only moderate changes during the first half of the year although brick and tile cement and structural steel reached new postwar peaks. Paint and paint material prices have continued to decline with supplies of raw materials ample. The rise in building materials prices has been accompanied by some increase in the prices of houses The prices of copper and zinc also advanced sharply reflecting the boom in durable goods as well as purchases for the stockpiling program. Supplies of copper and zinc are below present levels of demand. Beginning in March the price of zinc underwent a series of increases which raised it percent. Copper began to advance in April rising percent to a level cent below its postwar peak of cents per pound. On the other hand the price of lead displayed weakness during this period as supplies were ample to meet demand and the needs of the stockpile program were not great. However in July the price of lead advanced percent Capacity operations in steel increased the demand for scrap steel greatly causing prices to rise sharply. Then after approaching their postwar peaks a moderate reaction occurred. Although no general advance in steel prices occurred individual companies raised their prices on particular products while so-called conversion deals were numerous Rubber prices have more than doubled during the first half of The rise resulted partly from interruptions in normal marketing caused by political difficulties in the Far East but primarily because demand was increasing particularly in the United States. In June this market also reacted somewhat but late in the month under the influence of the develop894762 ments in Korea rubber prices rose again to exceed their previous peak Increases in tire prices accompanied the rise in rubber prices and the advances in the prices of other industrial materials were accompanied by some less extensive price advances at subsequent levels of fabrication Consumers3 prices. Consumers ' prices rose percent from December to June They fluctuated moderately during the first four months but increased sharply in May and June. The rise from April to May was points or percent and from May to June points or almost percent the greatest monthly increases since July In June the consumers ' price index was slightly above the level of a year earlier and percent below its postwar peak. The sharp rise in wholesale food prices since Korea indicates that retail food prices will probably increase sharply in July thus advancing the level of consumers ' prices. Consumer incomes have risen somewhat more than the increase in consumers ' prices so that the real purchasing power of consumers increased moderately during the half year The fluctuations in retail food prices have accounted for most of the changes in the consumers ' price index. Changes in other retail prices have been moderate. Rents continued their steady upward creep. Apparel prices which had declined steadily from late leveled off. The cost of electricity and refrigeration rose slowly. Fuel prices rose through the first four months of the year and then declined seasonally. ( See chart table and appendix table B-21. ) TABLE Changes in consumers ' prices Percentage change Item December to June All items Food Apparel Rent Fuel electricity and refrigeration House furnishings. _ _ Miscellaneous June to December December to June _ __ _ * Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table B-21. ) Wages and related matters Total wage and salary payments reflected the general pickup in economic activity during the first half of ( See appendix table B-5. ) They rose to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter an increase of billion dollars over the second quarter of and billion over the first quarter of This increase was due mainly to rising employment levels and higher wages for manufacturing workers although increased overtime also had some influence CHART CONSUMERS ' PRICES Consumers prices after moderate fluctuations during the first four months of increased sharply in May and June because of large advances in retail food prices. Rents continued to rise. Other prices showed slight change PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE '- b d = = b : rfe : d I I I M I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I M I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I t I ll PERCENTAGE CHANGES DECREASE INCREASE POSTWAR PEAK TO J U N E ALL ITEMS ' J U N E TO J U N E FOOD RENT -'ALSO INCLUDES HOUSEFURNISHINGS.FUEL ELECTRICITY REFRIGERATION AND MISCELLANEOUS GOODS AND SERVICES NOT SHOWN ON THIS CHART IS POSTWAR PEAK SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR Average hourly earnings in manufacturing reached an all-time high of $ in June of this year about cents higher than a year earlier. These increases have occurred in both durable and nondurable manufacturing The new minimum wage also brought about slight advances in average hourly earnings in such industries as lumber and wood products tobacco and apparel. Average weekly earnings of manufacturing workers reached a new record level of $ in June about $ above June ( See appendix tables B-ll B-12 and B-13. ) In general the pressure for wage advances in some industries and for pension and insurance plans in others continued strong throughout the first half of General wage advances were made oftener in nonmanufacturing industries than in manufacturing ; wage advances were particularly noteworthy in the construction industry. The spread of pension plans continued at a rapid pace. The number of organized workers affected by new pension plans or by increased employer contributions to established plans negotiated during the first five months of exceeded the total for all of Many of the negotiations in were characterized by less hesitancy than usual about making long-term commitments. Most of the agreements negotiated this year in contrast with many of last year 's contracts do not contain wage reopening privileges that can be exercised before the end of the first contract year The contract announced on May between General Motors and the UAW-CIO is highly significant because there are no provisions for reopening the contract within a five-year term. It also carried forward the two basic principles underlying the wage provisions of the contract. First it provides for quarterly cost-of-living adjustments of cent for each points change in the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumers ' Price Index without limit upward but reaching a lower limit at cents below the present cost-of-living allowance. Second it provides for annual 4-cent increases in wage rates based on a technological " improvement factor " in place of the similar 3-cent provision of the previous agreement. Thus the new contract gives renewed recognition to the principle of sharing productivity gains with workers on a regular basis The company has also agreed upon company-financed pensions integrated with Federal old-age and survivors insurance for workers retiring at years or older with at least years of service. Unlike other recent labor-management contracts the agreement provides for monthly benefits exceeding $ in the event of higher Federal old-age benefits. The agreement allows retirement for disability after years of service and age liberalizes the present insurance plan without additional cost to employees and provides for company payment of half the cost of hospitalization and surgical benefits for workers and their families The agreement between the United Mine Workers and the bituminous coal operators provided for a general wage increase of cents a day raising the daily rate to $ and increased the operators ' contributions to the welfare fund from cents per ton to cents. The contract runs until June subject to earlier termination on or after April Anthracite miners and the Progressive Mine Workers of America were provided with adjustments similar to those in the bituminous contract During the first five months of million man-days of idleness resulted from work stoppages or twice as many as the million man-days idle during the first five months of This was due largely to the Chrysler tie-up which kept about workers idle for days and to the extended coal stoppages which finally involved over miners. The number of work stoppages was about in the first five months of compared with stoppages in the first five months of The 99-day Chrysler controversy was ended on May with an agreement which provides pension and social insurance benefits increased vacation pay for some workers and some job and interplant wage adjustments. The wage disputes in the telehone industry are now in the process of being settled company by company Profits The general expansion in economic activity and the rise in wholesale prices during the first half of brought a sharp rise in business profits In the second quarter of corporate profits before taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) were running at an estimated seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion at 'their low point in the second quarter of a rise of billion or about percent. During the same period the gross national product rose billion dollars or about percent demonstrating the greater volatility of the profit structure. Corporate profits before taxes reached their postwar peak in the third quarter of at an annual rate of billion dollars ( See chart and appendix table B-29. ) After taxes corporate profits in the second quarter of were at an estimated seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion dollars in the second quarter of This represents a return of over percent on sales and almost percent on net worth compared with over percent and percent respectively a year earlier Net income of farm proprietors before taxes in the second quarter of ( after adjusting for changes in the value of physical inventories and for seasonal variations ) was at an annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion a year earlier a decline of percent. This was billion dollars below the first quarter level. The rise in farm prices during the first half of was not sufficient to offset the effects of lower marketings and higher costs Net income of unincorporated business and the professions ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) in the second quarter of was at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars before taxes compared with billion dollars in the second quarter of a rise of about percent This income component had been remarkably stable throughout ( See appendix table B-4. ) Although the general level of corporate profits was substantially higher than a year earlier the profit experience was markedly divergent among industries. In the manufacturing field the profits before taxes of such industries as electrical machinery automobiles chemicals building materials rubber products paper and allied products and textiles were considerably higher during the first quarter of than a year earlier. On the other hand in such industries as apparel petroleum iron and steel machinery transportation equipment and nonferrous metals profits during the first quarter of were substantially below their levels a year earlier although in most cases they were running well above their low points The differential structure of profits reflects the uneven impact of the increase in the demand for different commodities as well as the effect of special factors such as that of the coal strike on the operation of the steel industry. The expansion in the level of activity during the second quarter of has improved the profit position of most industries. ( See appendix tables B-31 and B-32. ) CHART CORPORATE PROFITS Corporate profits during the first half of I960 rose as production expanded and prices advanced. Dividends were at their postwar high and the level of undistributed profits also increased BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED PROFITS BEFORE TAXES ^ DIVIDEND PAYMENTS j I \ I I I960 U NO ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SEE APPENDIX TABLE / PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) B-4 There continues to be a significant difference in the profit experience by size of firm. The manufacturing corporations having assets of less than million dollars reported profits in the first quarter of well below the levels of a year earlier. The larger corporations were doing about as well as a year earlier while the largest corporations with assets of over million dollars were doing better. The lag in earnings of the smaller firms is accounted for by the fact that sales for these concerns during the first quarter of were still substantially below the level of early while the sales of the larger concerns were about as large. ( See appendix table B-33. ) The availability of profits as a source of funds for different purposes is greatly influenced by the trends in prices. When prices are rising as they were in the postwar period through part of the profits are locked up in the higher replacement costs of inventories. When prices are falling affecting adversely the level of profits as in the lower replacement costs of inventories free funds for other purposes. The funds thus freed offset to that extent the reduction in profits as a source of funds for such purposes as expansion of plant and equipment and the payment of dividends During the first half of wholesale prices rose thus increasing the replacement costs of inventories As the following table shows the net availability of funds from corporate profits after taxes after allowing for the change in the costs of replacing inventories was at an annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of While about percent below the level in the first half of this level was high enough to permit a further substantial increase in the liquid assets of corporations after increasing the volume of dividends and financing a high level of plant and equipment. ( See table and " Corporate Finance " in the section on Business Investment and Finance. ) TABLE Corporate profits and changes in costs of replacing inventories [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits Period Before taxes Annual rates seasonally adjusted : First half Second half ._ _- _ First half After taxes Net funds available from corporate profits for other purChanges in costs of reposes after placing inven- allowing for changes in tories l costs of replacing inventories Inventory valuation adjustment with sign reversed Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE : Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) The generally rewarding level of profits reflecting the improved business situation has been one of the factors which encouraged business to expand its plant and equipment expenditures substantially above levels previously anticipated. ( See appendix table B-17. ) In the main the level of profits is ample enough to provide funds for a volume of investment higher than that being currently undertaken although many firms are exceptions MONEY AND CREDIT The general upturn in business has been accompanied by a large rise in credit during the first half of In contrast to early when most types of credit expanded only slightly or declined credit developments this year have closely paralleled the expansionary pattern of In the first six months of last year total commercial bank loans contracted by billion dollars. The decline came to an end during the summer and in the autumn a marked rise got actively under way. During the last quarter of such loans expanded billion dollars or million dollars more than in the fourth quarter of In the first six months of loans of commercial banks rose billion dollars or about the same as in the corresponding period of ( See table and appendix table B-25. ) The rise in bank credit and other types as well during the first half of this year reflected a very active demand for consumer and mortgage credit and credit for purchasing securities. Business loans showed a moderate seasonal decline but much smaller than last year 's The total dollar volume of nonfarm mortgage recordings made by all types of financial institutions attained a record level nearly billion dollars during the first six months of the year nearly percent above the corresponding period of last year and almost percent above the first half of The net increase in mortgage debt was nearly billion dollars bringing the total up to over billion dollars at the end of June. An important factor was the large-scale mortgage purchases of the Federal National Mortgage Association TABLE Money and credit expansion selected items [ Billions of dollars ] Percentage change during the first half oftyear Item Commercial banks : Loans Investments : total U. S. Government securities _ Weekly reporting member banks : Loans : total Commercial industrial and agricultural Instalment credit Privately-held money supply _ _ ^ Change based on data for December and June Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Keserve System ( except as noted ) Consumer instalment credit has been steadily rising since last spring and at the end of June reached a total of billion dollars and was billion dollars above the level of a year earlier. During the first half of this year, the rise was more than twice as large as in the first six months of Accompanying this rise there has been a progressive relaxation of credit terms. ( See chart and appendix table B-24. ) Credit for purchasing or carrying securities most of which was advanced by banks also has risen markedly over the last year but still is very small in relation to total loans. Total customer borrowing on margin account has increased about million dollars or about percent since June of Total commercial bank loans on securities other than Federal Government securities amount to less than percent of their total loans A seasonal decline in business loans is to be expected during the first part of the year. This year the decline was very moderate. At the city banks a 300-rmllion-dollar decline in business and agricultural loans was reported for the first six months. It was no greater than the decline which occurred in the first six months of and billion dollars smaller than CHART CONSUMER CREDIT Since June total consumer credit has expanded by billion dollars reaching a total of billion BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS END OF MONTH J/ P R E L I M I N A R Y ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) last year 's. In June business loans of city banks started to rise again at a substantially more rapid rate than in whereas in it was August before the contraction ended. Inventory buying associated with recent international events probably will not be reflected in bank credit until later. ( See appendix table B-25. ) As a result of the concentration of tax payments which is normal for the first quarter and a decline of more than billion dollars in the holdings of Government securities by Federal Reserve and commercial banks the money supply ( privately-held deposits and currency ) decreased by about billion dollars in the first quarter of ( See appendix tables B-26 and B-27. ) The decline however was only about one-half as large as occurred in the first quarters of and The smaller first quarter drain on private deposits this year was primarily a reflection of the change in the Government 's financial position brought about through smaller tax payments and larger Government cash expenditures. In the second quarter of the year the money supply again rose substantially more than offsetting the first quarter decline The rise in borrowing has not resulted in a general tightening in credit terms. Through the first half of the year business loan rates and private security yields showed little change. Private financial institutions showed increased willingness to make mortgage loans on more favorable terms. ( See appendix table B-28. ) In view of the substantial business recovery we have had in the past year the over-all rise in bank credit did not appear alarming prior to the Korean development. But the rate at which credit has been advancing recently as shortages have appeared in many sectors of the economy is a cause for concern. Any substantial increase in defense expenditures will make necessary effective measures of credit restraint THE FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER Personal income consumption expenditures and saving Personal income. Personal income in the second quarter of this year attained an annual rate of billion dollars seasonally adjusted a gain of billion dollars or percent over the last quarter of The decline of billion dollars at an annual rate from the first quarter of this year was due to the reduced flow of payments on the veterans ' life insurance dividend. All major components of earned income except farm and rental income were higher in the second quarter than in the first About billion dollars ( billion at an annual rate ) was distributed to veterans as a dividend on National Service Life Insurance in the first quarter of the year. In the second quarter the payment was largely completed by paying out an additional million dollars ( billion at an annual rate ) Over million veterans received checks which averaged about $ apiece. While actual payments were concentrated in the first quarter the effects spread over a much longer period. Part of the rise in CHART PERSONAL INCOME Personal income rose by almost I0 ) biUion dollars ( annual rate ) ,or percent from the second half of to the first half of The peak in the first quarter was caused by the veterans ' dividend BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BUSINESS PROFESSIONAL AND OTHER INCOME-// i949 -'OTHER INCOME CONSIST OF RENTS INTEREST AND DIVIDENDS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) I960 other income may be attributed indirectly to the dividend. ( See chart ) During the first half of total compensation of employees rose by billion dollars to billion dollars but not all this increase was reflected in take-home pay. The social security tax was increased from to percent of covered wages effective in January and there was an increase in employer contributions to private funds which are considered as an addition to the compensation of workers. ( See appendix table B-6. ) Business and professional income also rose throughout the first half of this year. Farm income the only principal component of income to decline fell by almost percent. Since the decline has been in the neighborhood of one-third. ( See chart and appendix tables B-4 andB-5. ) Almost all the increase in personal income was reflected in spendable income which increased percent during the half year. ( See appendix table B-7. ) Allowing for the lower level of prices total real disposable income in the second quarter of although below the first quarter was percent higher than in the last quarter of the previous peak. But because of the upward trend in population there was very little increase in real per capita disposable income from the last quarter of to the second quarter of this year. ( See appendix table B-8. ) Distribution of income. Data showing how income is distributed among high- and low-income receivers are not available for In the year for the first time since the end of the war there was an increase in the proportion of the Nation 's spending units having less than $ annual money income. Thirty percent of spending units in had incomes of less than $ compared with percent in In the proportion increased to percent. ( See table ) TABLE Distribution of the Nation 's spending units by income level Percent of all spending units Annual money income before taxes Under $ $ to $ _ $ to $ $ to $ _ $ to $ $ to $ $ a n d over _ _ _ __ _ _ All income groups Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System The drop in farm income and higher unemployment in than in preceding years contributed to the rise in the proportion of units having less than $ Both farmers and unskilled workers fared less well than other occupational groups in according to the Survey of Consumer Finances. Recently there has been a decrease in unemployment but no gain in farm income Personal consumption expenditures. Personal consumption expenditures at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter of were billion dollars or percent above the last quarter of Consumers ' prices were slightly higher. ( See charts and ) The payment of the NSLI dividend in the first quarter of undoubtedly had a major influence on the rise in consumer spending especially on the purchase of durables. In the strongest factor in the consumer picture was the demand for automobiles while sales of other durables and nondurables were substantially below Automobile sales continued to increase during the first half of this year. The most significant change from however was an increase of about percent in purchases of furniture and household equipment. Expenditures for food and other nondurables also increased and expenditures for services continued to move upward partly as a result of increases in rents and utility costs. ( See appendix table B-2. ) Since mid-1948 service charges and rents have continued to rise while prices of consumer goods have declined. Because of this from the third quarter of total services have increased almost as much as total consumption expenditures. In actual quantities however purchases of goods increased as rapidly as purchases of services throughout and and more rapidly during the first half of Personal saving and dissaving. The rate of saving in the first half of this year has been greatly distorted by the payment of billion dollars of the veterans ' dividend on National Service Life Insurance. A considerable part of this was used to add to liquid assets to retire debt or to buy homes all of which adds to saving. The total volume of personal net saving rose from billion dollars at an annual rate in the fourth quarter of to billion in the first quarter of when most of the veterans ' dividend was distributed. Personal saving then declined to billion in the second quarter The rate of saving in relation to disposable income in the postwar period has fluctuated greatly. After reaching a low in the second quarter of savings rose rapidly to a peak in the fourth quarter of and then declined as income declined in A major part of the fluctuation was probably due to changes in direct investment in personal business particularly in inventories while " household " saving has been more nearly constant. The sharp rise in saving in was associated with tangible investments in farms businesses and homes while the increase in debt was larger than the increase in financial assets. ( See table ) In the recession year on the other hand increases in financial assets were slightly greater than in and there was a less rapid growth in mortgage debt consumer credit and personal business debt. Investment in homes declined moderately and investment in personal businesses dropped by billion dollars Similar detail is not available for but it is evident that as a result of the CHART PERSONAL INCOME SPENDING AND SAVING Consumer incomes rose substantially in first half of I960 due in part to payment of the National Service Life Insurance dividend. Expenditures rose less than income and the rate of saving increased BILLIONS OF D O L L A R S BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME ( PERSONAL INCOME LESS TAXES ) PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES I I I I I I I960 PERCENT PERCENT PERSONAL NET SAVING AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME __ D o r ~ i s ' ! f ^ * * " ! '- ' _ ! EI n PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) I rn_ < o ^ veterans ' dividend cash and deposit holdings after allowance for seasonal factors have increased at a more rapid rate than in the rise in debt The net addition to personal saving of billion dollars in and billion in represents a much larger total saving on the part of those families whose assets increased more than their debts offset in part by dissaving on the part of other families. Slightly more than out of every spending units spent more than they earned in a somewhat larger proportion than in according to the Survey of Consumer Finances. In as in previous years large numbers of families at all income levels spent more than they earned. Between and however the increase in dissaving was almost wholly among families with incomes under $ TABLE Components oj personal saving [ Billions of dollars ] Item Increase infinancialassets _ _ Currency deposits U. S. Government bonds and saving and loan shares Insurance reserves ( private ) __ Corporate and State and municipal securities Less * Increase in debt Mortgage debt ( residential ) Consumer debt Business debt _ Equals : Net financial saving Personal business investment Purchases of new homes _ Plus : Net tangible investment Plus * Errors and omissions Equals ' Net personal saving NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Securities and Exchange Commission Dissaving may take the form of liquidating bank deposits or other assets or increases in consumer credit. The rapid rate of increase in consumer debt in the latter part of has been resumed after the normal seasonal contraction during the first part of this year. The veterans ' dividend had no discernible effect in reducing instalment debt and in the case of automobile purchases it may have stimulated debt incurrence by furnishing a down payment. As shown in chart by the end of June consumer debt had risen to billion dollars or over billion above a year earlier The ratio of consumer debt to disposable income was only slightly below that during the same period in Mortgage debt also rose rapidly in and the first half of this year The rapidity of the rise in personal debt which has been growing faster than income since has given rise to some concern that the volume of debt is becoming too high for economic stability. In over CHART PERSONAL INCOME AND DEBT The ratio of personal debt to income at the end of last year was far below that of and BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME PERSONAL * -DEBT I/ & L/ END OF YEAR / PRELIMINARY ESTIMATE FOR PERSONAL DEBT BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) percent of consumer units had debts of some kind about percent had mortgages on homes and percent had instalment debt. However total personal and noncorporate debt and interest in relation to incomes are now much lower than prewar. As chart shows the ratio of noncorporate debt to personal disposable income has fallen from percent in and percent in to percent in As a result of the lower debt ratio and of lower interest rates the ratio of personal interest payments to disposable income was only percent in compared with percent in and percent in Furthermore many families who have gone into debt also have reserves of liquid assets. Since the war financial assets have grown as rapidly as personal debt The stock of financial assets in the hands of consumers farmers and personal business is now above billion dollars or over twice as great as annual disposable personal income. About half these assets are in a form readily convertible into cash. The ratio of total financial assets to income has fallen since principally because of the rise in the price level The ratio of liquid assets including cash Government bonds and saving and loan shares to personal income after taxes has risen from about percent to over percent Nevertheless there are disturbing factors in the debt and asset situation The distribution of liquid assets is highly concentrated in the upper income groups. The upper percent of families in terms of annual income owned percent of bank deposits and Government bonds in early These groups also hold large amounts of corporate and State-local securities which are not commonly owned by families with less income. At the beginning of percent of all spending units had no Government savings bonds or bank deposits a slightly higher proportion than in and percent had less than $ ( See table ) Fifty-six percent of the spending units in the under $ income group and percent in the $ $ income group had none of these assets at the beginning of This concentration of liquid assets among higher income groups does not provide as accessible a reservoir of purchasing power as if they were more broadly distributed Moreover while the level of personal debt and the interest burden are still relatively low some categories of debt have been rising very rapidly particularly consumer instalment debt and mortgage debt. The increase in consumer credit which has been stimulated by progressive lengthening of repayment periods and lower down payments has been a potent factor in the high and increasing demand for houses and for consumers ' durables The stepped-up military requirements since the Korean development will involve increased demands for many of the important types of materials which are already in short supply and which are used in the production of these consumer items TABLE Percentage of the Nation 's spending units having no liquid assets or less than $ Annual money income before taxes Asset holdings and period All spending units No liquid assets : Liquid assets of less than $ or no liquid assets : __ _ Under $ $ $ $ $ $ and over Includes deposits saying and loan shares and U. S. Government bonds. Does not include currency Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Business investment and finance Gross private domestic investment during the second quarter of was running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars compared with the low point of billion in the fourth quarter of a rise of nearly billion. ( See chart table and appendix table B-3. ) During the same period the gross national product increased by billion dollars from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion to billion. ( See appendix table B-l. ) The all-time peak rate of gross private domestic investment ( billion dollars ) was reached in the fourth quarter of This was percent of the gross national product contrasted with percent for the year percent for the year and percent in the second quarter of The greater part of the fluctuation in total business investment in the past years has occurred in the inventory component. As table shows the annual rate of business investment exclusive of inventories ( i. e.5 investment in construction and equipment alone ) dropped by only billion dollars from the fourth-quarter peak to the third-quarter low and then rose by billion dollars to an all-time record rate of billion in the second quarter of New highs were also reached in the second quarter in outlays for producers ' durable equipment and for private housing the two largest components of the private construction and equipment total TABLE Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Total gross private domestic investment Period Construction and equipment Total Nonfarm residential construction Other private construction Producers ' Inventory change > durable equipment : Second half : First half Second half : First half : First quarter- Second quarter Third quarter Jb'ourth quarter : First quarter...J Second quarter _ : Third quarter Fourth quarter S i See appendix table B-3 for further details After inventory valuation adjustment * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) Plant and equipment. After a steady but moderate decline during total outlays for plant and equipment ( on a seasonally adjusted basis ) rose CHART BUSINESS INVESTMENT Most of the change in gross private domestic investment since early has reflected inventory movements. Investment in producers1 equipment and in housing reached new highs in the second quarter of I960 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED TOTAL GROSS PRIVATE DOMESTIC INVESTMENT PRODUCERS ' DURABLE EQUIPMENT NET CHANGE IN * r BUSINESS INVENTORIES \ \ I I960 J-/ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) substantially during the first half of ( See appendix table B-3. ) These fluctuations reflect mainly a decline and a recovery in purchases of equipment An upward trend in new orders received by producers of machinery and equipment set in during the latter part of and became more pronounced in early There is no sign yet of any slackening in these orders. The general improvement in business conditions has created more optimistic anticipations and greater stress is being placed on reduction of costs by replacement of obsolescent equipment The most recent survey of anticipated business plant and equipment outlays conducted by the Department of Commerce and the Securities and Exchange Commission in April and May pointed to a sustained high level of such investment during the latter part of this year. ( See appendix table B-17. ) For the third quarter respondents anticipated plant and equipment outlays somewhat greater than those of the corresponding quarter of and much more than seasonally higher than those of the first quarter of when expenditures were curtailed by steel shortage due to work stoppages. The third-quarter outlook reported in the survey reflects the expectations of profitable investment by public utilities and manufacturers at higher levels than a year earlier ; businessmen in the other major fields estimated their outlays in both the second and third quarters of at a little below those of a year before. On the basis of the reports for the first three quarters of it would appear that plant and equipment outlays for the whole year may set a new annual record in the gas and electric utility field and may nearly equal for nonfarm business as a whole Nonfarm inventories. A major development during the first quarter of was the resumption of nonfarm inventory accumulation. This was a large element contributing to the recovery movement of the economy during the first half of the year. Under the stimulus of expansion in demand in the first half of the level of production was restored to the point where a substantial accumulation of inventories is again taking place During the first quarter nonfarm inventories were being accumulated at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars. In the second quarter the rate rose to billion. Compared with a peak annual rate of liquidation of billion in the fourth quarter of this represented a net upward shift of billion accounting for half of the total rise in gross national product. ( See appendix table B-3. ) The rate of growth of inventories reached in the second quarter of may be slightly in excess of what will be needed on the average to keep pace with the historical long-run trend of business expansion. Stocks do not appear excessive in relation to current production and sales. At mid- year however there were some evidences of efforts to accumulate extra inventories in anticipation of possible shortages The book value of business inventories in manufacturing and trade rose from billion dollars at the end of December on a seasonally adjusted basis to billion dollars at the end of May In dollar terms they were still about percent below the peak level of billion dollars reached in November But when adjusted for changes in prices the current volume of inventories is probably close to the peak level The largest increases in book value of inventories have taken place in the trade segment. In the first five months of the book value of retail inventories increased about percent and that of wholesale inventories about percent after allowance for seasonal variation. The increase in manufacturers ' inventories was only percent. During the previous period of inventory liquidation the largest decline had been in manufacturers ' inventories which fell more than percent from January to November Trade inventories fell percent from the November peak to December ( See appendix tables B-18 B-19 and B-20. ) Corporate finance. During the first half of this year reflecting changes in working capital needs the total financial requirements of corporations were considerably above the first half of In the first six months of last year corporations liquidated about billion dollars of their inventory holdings and accounts receivable. This year the working capital requirements of corporations increased. With their plant and equipment expenditures only million dollars below the level of a year ago their financial requirements for plant and equipment inventories and receivables were billion dollars above the first half of Corporations continued to increase their liquid asset holdings at about the same rate as a year ago despite their larger requirements for funds. ( See chart and appendix table B-34. ) Corporations as a group were able to meet from internal sources of funds all of their financial requirements for plant and equipment outlays and for additions to inventories. During the first half of the year rising total profit levels permitted an increase in retained earnings about percent above the first six months of while dividend payments continued to increase. The total amount of funds obtained by corporations from outside sources was less than billion dollars and exceeded by only some million dollars the amount corporations themselves invested in further liquid asset accumulation. Last year when their investment in inventories and customer accounts was declining corporations were able to finance their plant and equipment expenditures internally and in addition they had sufficient funds to retire debt and accumulate liquid assets The experience during the last months when corporations on balance were self-financing is in striking contrast to the developments in the period when they needed more than billion dollars annually from external sources New security issues ( the bulk of which were public-utility issues ) were the only important source of external funds during the first half of the year The total volume of funds obtained from this source was about billion dollars less than during the first six months of ; but a higher portion was in stock issues Corporate bank loans and trade debt showed a moderate seasonal decline during the first half of the year. To a smaller extent than last year proceeds from new security issues were used to retire bank loans CHART SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS The total corporate financial requirements for inventories receivables and plant and equipment were substantially higher in the first half of I960 than in the corresponding period of On an overall basis internal sources of funds were adequate to meet these requirements BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I | SOURCES i ; ; i949,'iFiRST " HALPi ; i ; ; : i : i : i : ii ; | RETAINED EARNINGS | [ l950v FIRST " DEPRECIATION RESERVES OTHFR | ij ( SOURCES ^ r HALFJ/ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ USES PLANT AND EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS CHANGE ! ' iiMCvMiixM ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ' IN INVENTORIES OTHER USES ii ; j949,yFiRsfiHALFiii ; i L .//PROFIT ESTIMATES FOR FIRST HALF BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S I/ NEGATIVE ITEM IN RESULTED FROM DECLINE IN TRADE PAYABLES FEDERAL INCOME TAX LIABILITY AND BANK LOANS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) Though there are substantial differences between the financial positions of large and smaller corporations on an over-all basis corporate liquidity is very high at the present time. At the end of June corporations held around billion dollars in cash deposits and Government securities only about billion dollars less than their total accumulation at the end of the war As a measure of their liquidity the ratio of their cash deposits and Government securities to their current liabilities is now about percent compared with percent at the end of percent at the end of percent at the end of and about percent in and This present high degree of liquidity of business corporations together with rising profits and the favorable business outlook should promote a continued high level of business investment and perhaps a further increase The major problem now is to channel investment into those areas where it is most needed to support our increasing international commitments Construction. Construction activity was at a peacetime high during the first half of whether measured in dollars or in physical terms. It was a strong expansionary force during this period. Total new construction activity including both public and private was running at an annual rate of billion dollars in June about percent higher than a year earlier For the first half of total construction activity was at an annual rate of billion dollars up percent from the first half of About three-fourths of the current outlay is private and one-fourth public. The new peak in construction activity is in major part the result of the housing boom which began in the late spring of ( See appendix table B-16. ) The very high current rate of construction involves heavy demands for labor and materials. Construction wages and the prices of building materials have been rising since midsummer of Private construction activity during the first six months was at an annual rate of billion dollars a rise of percent compared with a year earlier Nonfarm residential construction activity rose percent while other private construction declined about percent. Nonfarm housing starts reached the unprecedented level of thousand units in June after making new records in March April and May with thousand thousand and thousand respectively. For the first six months starts totaled thousand compared with thousand during the same period of a rise of over percent. The unusually mild winter in much of the country was a factor in achieving this high level of starts but housing starts have continued very high throughout the first half of the year The increase in the construction of private multifamily units which was so noticeable in continued in Nearly percent more multifamily units were started in the first six months of than in the same period of facilitated by the use of section of the National Housing Act which provides for insurance of loans for rental projects Nonresidential private construction during the first half of was somewhat lower than in the first half of Construction of stores restaurants and garages was slightly higher while factory construction was considerably less. Industrial construction rose more than seasonally through the first half of however and the increase in contracts indicates a further rise. Public utility construction outlays during the first half of were percent below the first half of and farm construction was down percent. On the other hand private institutional construction was at higher levels during the first half of than a year earlier v/ith large rises reported for hospitals and religious institutions Public construction in the first half of was at an annual rate of billion dollars a rise of percent over a year ago. The largest increases were for schools hospitals and other types of public building where the needs are still great. Expenditures for conservation and development also showed a large increase. Highway expenditures were slightly higher than during the first half of Expenditures for public housing were substantially higher in the first half of than a year earlier although the level of activity is still low Moreover after expanding rapidly in the second half of the rate of activity leveled off during the first half of During the first six months of the number of public housing starts was less than thousand compared with about thousand in the same months of Most of the public housing has been under State or local auspices. Federal subsidized low-rent housing under the Housing Act has been relatively insignificant in amount International transactions In the first half of both United States exports of goods and services and the surplus of these exports over imports were running at a rate of to billion dollars a year less than during the first half of With the shrinkage of United States exports that has taken place over the past months exports and the export surplus were reduced for the first time since the war to a proportion of the gross national product not significantly greater than before the war. Thus their importance as a factor in the net demand for United States production was considerably reduced. Their relation to gross national product in recent periods compared with prewar and with their postwar peak is shown in table TABLE United States international transactions as percent of gross national product [ Percent ] Exports of goods and services Period Export surplus i average _ Annual rates : first half ( postwar peak ) first half first half _ Includes income on investments Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) Imports of goods and services CHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES The continued reduction in exports in the first half of I960 together with the rise in imports resulted in the lowest export surplus since the war BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I I960 I/ INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENTS & PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) The decline in the export surplus since the first half of resulted almost entirely from a fall in total exports ; imports of goods and services rose only slightly in value. It should be noted that a considerable part of the decline in the export surplus and most of the decline in total exports had already taken place by the end of Further declines occurred in the first quarter of but in the second quarter it appears from preliminary data that the trend has been stopped. ( See chart and table ) Although the value of imports of goods and services in the first half of was only slightly higher than in the first half of this value represented a significant increase above the second half of especially when seasonal factors in our imports of services are taken into account The change in our export surplus since the second half of resulted about equally from a fall in our exports of goods and a rise in our imports of goods nonseasonal changes in services having been relatively small. The rise in merchandise imports brought their dollar value back to the prerecession level of early ( See appendix table B-35. ) TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services Period average Imports of goods and services * Surplus of exports of goods and services * Annua rates : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter. _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ Includes income on investments Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) This expansion in the dollar value of merchandise imports in the first part of continued a movement which had begun with the recovery of United States business activity in mid-1949 before the devaluation of foreign currencies. This is brought out by the monthly figures shown in chart It has taken the form mainly of an increase in the quantity of goods purchased. Despite declining dollar prices particularly in semimanufactured products which followed the devaluations abroad sharply rising world prices for foodstuffs mainly coffee and cocoa and subsequent increases in certain raw materials such as rubber and semimanufactured materials such as copper have given average import prices a slightly rising tendency. Upward movements were sharply accentuated by the outbreak of hostilities in Korea The additional dollars which the recent rise of imports made available to foreign countries were more than offset by the decline in our foreign aid which was being provided during the first half of this year at an annual rate about billion dollars lower than in the first half of ( See table and appendix table B-37. ) Since foreign purchases from us were considerably below their levels however foreign gold and dollar reserves increased substantially The reduction of Government aid in accordance with the reduced needs of foreign countries ^ and the replenishment of their gold and dollar reserves are both desirable. Foreign reserves are still below adequate levels. The reduced figure for the net outward flow of American capital in the first quarter of this year resulted from an accelerated return of short-term capital as foreign countries repaid commercial debts to us. This bulge in debt repayment is a desirable but temporary phenomenon The decrease of merchandise exports brought their value in the first five months of down percent below the first five months of and brought their quantity down by percent. The decline has affected nearly all important commodities except cotton the exports of which have in fact increased. The largest absolute drop accounting for one-third of the reduction in total exports was in shipments of certain foodstuffs namely wheat and other grains. Among the other commodities most affected were machinery iron and steel-mill products automobiles textiles coal petroleum and tobacco TABLE Financing the surplus of goods and services supplied to foreign countries [ Billions of dollars ] Means of financing Surplus of Liquidation exports of goods and U. S. Gov- of foreign gold and ernment services * dollar sources a assets s ( net ) ( net ) Period average Other means of financing ( net ) Annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter __ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter fl First quarter Second quarter Outflow of United States private capital * ( net ) Includes income on investments Includes grants and loans but excludes subscription to the capital of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund. For detail, ' see appendix table B-37 Includes net sales of gold to the United States and net liquidation of foreign dollar assets including longterm investments. Excludes liquidation of assets held by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund Includes both long-term and short-term capital but excludes purchase of obligations of the International Bank Includes private gifts net dollar disbursements by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund and allowance for errors and omissions Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) The decline of exports appears to have ended in the first few months of the year and the levels then reached may be maintained or perhaps exceeded in the second half of this year even apart from any increases that may result from recent international developments Effects of devaluation on United States foreign trade. The effect of the currency devaluations upon our imports appears so far to have been rela- CHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS QUANTITY AND UNIT VALUE Both the quantity and unit value ( average prices ) of exports in early I960 were below the second half of The quantity and unit value of imports were higher PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE U.S. MERCHANDISE EXPORTS | I PERCENT OF AVERAGE J F M A M J J A S O N D j J F M A M J PERCENT OF AVERAGE U.S. IMPORTS FOR CONSUMPTION SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I960 lively limited. Until recently the average dollar price of our imports was about percent less than in early though above the June-November levels. The quantities except in the case of foodstuffs are greater Most of the price decline since early however was not attributable to the devaluations since the declines occurred to a considerable extent before devaluations took place The increase in the quantity of goods imported has undoubtedly been given some impetus by the lower values of foreign currencies. But part of the increase since last summer probably reflects the temporarily depressed level of purchases at that time caused by the expectation that devaluation might occur. It is also to be noted from chart that the quantity of imports particularly of crude and semifinished materials began to rise with the recovery in United States business activity somewhat earlier than can be accounted for by devaluation. Moreover the sharpest increases in the first few months after devaluation occurred in imports of crude foodstuffs ; these increases appear to have resulted largely from seasonal factors not from devaluation. ( See chart and appendix tables B-43 and B-44. ) So far as exports are concerned shipments of food semimanufactured and finished manufactured products declined somewhat after devaluation but in recent months exports of the latter two classes of commodities appear to have recovered slightly while exports of crude materials are substantially higher than they were in the months preceding devaluation. ( See appendix tables B-40 and B-41. ) Prior to the devaluations many foreign countries were already intensifying restrictions on imports from us in order to stop losses of gold and dollar reserves. To this extent devaluation by making our goods more expensive abroad may have been in large part a substitute for direct import restrictions that had been or would otherwise have been imposed rather than a cause of additional curtailment of our exports. It seems clear however that devaluation has contributed to the recent improvement in the dollar positions of many countries by shifting price relationships between goods that foreign countries must pay for with dollars and goods that can be paid for with other currencies Changes in areas of total export surplus. The decline in our exports of goods and services to countries participating in the European Recovery Program their dependencies and nonparticipating countries in the sterling areas accounted for nearly one-half of the total reduction in our export surplus of goods and services from the first quarter of to the same period of But we maintained a large surplus with Western Europe and also with Japan. As a result of our lower exports to and our heavier purchases from other parts of the world particularly the Latin American Republics our export surplus with these other major areas was reversed. ( See appendix table B-36. ) For the first time since the war we developed an import surplus with the Latin American countries as a group and with the nonEuropean countries in the sterling area. We also had an import surplus on merchandise trade alone with Africa and Australia and an approximately balanced merchandise position with Canada for the first time since the war. ( See appendix tables B-38 B-39 and B-42. ) This development should not be interpreted as meaning that dollar payments are now purely a Western European and Japanese problem. In the first place the developments in the first quarter of may be partly temporary. But more fundamental are two other considerations. One is that the cut in our surpluses with some areas results in part from the enforcement in these areas of more rigorous restrictions by them against imports from the United States. To this extent the reduction in our export surplus with the world as a whole and with particular areas may mean not that their excess demand for dollars under existing world price relationships has disappeared but merely that it has been suppressed by direct controls of external trade alone rather than by price adjustments or by excise or other taxes which would affect both internal and external trade on a nondiscriminatory basis The other fundamental consideration is that the existence of a surplus with one area does not mean that dollar payment difficulties if any exist are necessarily caused by the trading and financial relations of that area with the United States. A United States export surplus with one area may be normal and desirable ; dollar difficulties of that area may arise from inability to earn dollars in other areas. This will depend in part upon its competitive position in other areas and in part upon the volume of dollars which these other areas obtain in the United States through earnings or capital imports. Thus it is generally believed that Western Europe will continue to import from the United States more than it exports to it after the European Recovery Program ends and that it can be self-supporting only if it earns gold and dollars in other areas Government transactions NOTE. As has been customary in previous reports government transactions are here measured on the so-called consolidated cash basis rather than in terms of the conventional budget. Cash payments to and receipts from the public reflect the volume of current cash transactions between government on the one hand and the public including business foreign countries and international institutions on the other All intragovernmental transactions are eliminated. Such data are more useful for assessing the immediate economic impacts of government programs than are the data in the conventional budget. A detailed description of the concepts used is given in the Budget of the United States page All levels of government combined Federal State and local directly employed some percent of the total number of civilians employed in the United States during the first half of this year. Government purchases of goods and services represented about percent of the total gross national product. In the field of new construction alone government activity accounted for percent of the total. Total cash payments by all levels of government including such transfer payments as old-age pensions public assistance and unemployment compensation amounted to a figure nearly one-fourth as large as total gross national product These figures indicate the major role played by government in the Nation 's economy. In terms of annual rates total cash payments by all levels of government amounted to about billion dollars during the first half of this year of which the special dividend in repayment of past excessive premiums under the National Service Life Insurance program computed at an annual rate accounted for somewhat over billion. Total cash receipts were at an annual rate of about billion dollars or about billion dollars less than cash payments. Quite apart from the relationship between total payments and total receipts the very large and relatively stable programs represented by these dollar figures exert a major impact on economic developments. ( See table ) TABLE Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Calendar year Eeceipt or payment Total Cash receipts : Federal _ _ ._ __ State and local _ Total cash payments Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) : Federal State and local. _ ._ __ Total surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) __ _ _ _ _ Calendar year Second half first half i ._ Total cash receipts Cash payments : Federal State and local First half _ * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A Cash payments by the Federal Government. Excluding the NSLI dividend Federal cash payments to the public declined from billion dollars in to an annual rate of billion during the first half of this year Including disbursement of the dividend the annual rate of total payments during the first half was billion The major explanation for the decline of billion dollars in the annual rate of total Federal cash payments ( apart from NSLI dividend ) to the public lies in the area of international programs aggregate payments for which declined by some billion dollars. This large decline resulted partly from anticipated trends partly from a repayment to the Treasury by the International Monetary Fund of cash previously received and partly from a lag of expenditures behind expected schedules. The other major areas of decline were in net cash expenditures for farm price support ; and in expenditures for defense where there was also a lag behind expected schedules as well as an intensified efficiency drive resulting in a considerable reduction in civilian payrolls These and other declines were more than sufficient to bring about a decline in total cash payments ( excluding the NSLI dividend ) despite a continued very high level of unemployment compensation and public assistance payments and a steady increase in public works. Unemployment compensation payments were at a postwar peak during the first quarter of this year reflecting the peak unemployment prevailing during those months ; and did not decline sufficiently during the second quarter to bring the rate for the half-year below the level TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Calendar year Classification of payment Direct payments for goods and services : To individuals _ _ _ _ _ T o business a n d international ,__ _ _ _ _ _ Loans and transfer payments to individuals ( excluding NSLI dividend ) Loans investments subsidies and other transfers to business and agricultureLoans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions Clearing account and adjustment to Daily Treasury Statement _ _ _ _ Subtotal NSLI dividend Total Federal cash payments Calendar year first half * _ _ _ Estimates based on incomplete data Total of billion dollars for the first half of expressed as an annual rate NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A Cash payments by State and local governments. Incomplete information indicates that cash payments by State and local governments during the first half of continued their upward trend running at an estimated annual rate of about billion dollars compared with billion in ( See table and chart ) This upward trend reflects the continuing pressure of wartime backlogs large population changes and a lagging response to the postwar rise in the general level of prices wages and salaries Federal cash receipts the cash deficit and changes in the publicly held Federal debt. Federal cash receipts from the public during the first half of this year were at an annual rate of billion dollars or about billion below the first half of ( See table and chart ) This decline occurred despite the percent increase in the rate of employment tax in support of the old-age insurance system which became effective as of January and which increased the annual rate of cash receipts by about three-quarters of a billion dollars ; and despite a decline of similar magnitude in tax refunds which produced a corresponding increase in net cash receipts There was a sharp drop of over billion dollars in the rate of receipts from the corporate profits tax. Since these taxes are collected with a lag of about one year from the period when the liability actually accrues this CHART GOVERNMENT CASH RECEIPTS FROM AND PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC The net cash position of the Federal Government showed a deficit of about billion dollars during the first half of which was more than accounted for by the NSLI dividend. State and local governments continued to show a cash deficit FEDERAL BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ^ DEFICIT PAYMENTS/- PAYMENTS RECEIPTS/ RECEIPTS/ y First Half " STATE AND LOCAL BILLIONS OF DOLLARS -DEFICIT PAYMENTS/ RECEIPTS/ f FirstHair CALENDAR YEARS -'ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX A drop reflected the much lower level of profits in comparison with The present high and rising level of profits with the accompanying increase in tax liabilities accruing will not be reflected in cash receipts until the first quarter of the calendar year The only other category of receipts showing a considerable decline during the first half of this year was that of personal income taxes not withheld i. e. largely taxes on the incomes of fanners professional persons and unincorporated businesses and on dividends interest rents and other sources of income not subject to withholding. As with corporate taxes payments during the first half of this year were based in large part on the income levels of The present rising level of incomes and tax liabilities will not be fully reflected in receipts until next year Receipts from surplus property continued their steady decline and now represent only a minor source of revenue. Other major categories of receipts personal income taxes withheld employment taxes and excises apart from the increase in the OASI tax rate and from technical changes in reporting and deposit practices have shown only very moderate changes over the past months. There was a slight dropping off during the second half of last year and a roughly compensating increase during the first half of this year. If business conditions continue to improve this increase may be expected to continue and accelerate Excluding the NSLI dividend Federal cash receipts from the public would have exceeded cash payments on a seasonally adjusted basis by about * billion dollars during the first half of this year compared with the cash deficit of nearly l/ billion in Taking into account the very large and rapid disbursement of the insurance dividend during this period however the annual rate of total payments exceeded the rate of receipts by nearly billion dollars TABLE Federal cash receipts from the public [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Source of cash receipts Calendar year Calendar year first half i Direct taxes on individuals Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes Excises and customs Surplus property receipts Deposits by States unemployment insurance Veterans ' life insurance premiums Other Less ? Refunds of receipt ? ? Total Federal cash receipts from the public i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A Apart from the broad trends in the annual rates of receipts and payments the importance of regular seasonal changes in the relation between receipts and payments should be recognized. In recent years there has been a large excess of cash receipts over cash payments in the four months of December to March and June and September have also shown surpluses. This is due to the relative concentration of tax payments in those months under the present tax laws and it entails problems of transfer of funds from individuals and corporations to the Treasury and imposes a serious although temporary pressure upon the reserves of banks through which the transfers are made Following the usual pattern the concentration of tax payments in the early months of carried cash receipts high enough to produce a cash surplus of about billion dollars in the first quarter of the year notwithstanding the effects of the business recession of the preceding year and the increase in payments over those of the first part of arising from the NSLI dividend. April and May were as usual deficit months and June a month of surplus. In the first six months of the year there was a cash deficit of less than million dollars. The publicly held debt was enlarged by about billion dollars from the December level and on June was about billion. This increase was largely absorbed by individuals and nonbank corporations and associations Federal budget receipts the budget deficit and changes in the national debt. The foregoing analysis has been in terms of the consolidated cash statement of Government transactions rather than in terms of the so-called conventional budget. The conventional budget however is equally important in many respects. It is the conventional budget with which most businessmen and legislators are chiefly concerned. It is the deficit in that budget which is found disquieting by many whose own decisions about business plans are influenced by pessimistic views about the threat to national credit and by many legislators in determining their attitude upon a wide range of national economic policies. In the recent postwar years there has been continuous discussion of the budget the budget surplus and the budget deficit and very seldom has it related to any other than the conventional budget transmitted by the President to the Congress and reported upon daily in the statement of the Treasury as the fiscal year advances. A budget surplus means a reduction in the national debt the objective of everyone. A budget deficit means an increase in the national debt Even though a substantial fraction of this increase may represent a corresponding increase in the assets of Federal trust accounts businessmen and legislators are concerned about it Because of seasonally high tax receipts and a lag in expenditure programs budget receipts and expenditures for the first half of this year were in close balance with a budget surplus of nearly million dollars. The balance in the general fund of the Treasury at the close of the half year was billion dollars up about million from the December figure. The increase was more than sufficient to offset the increase of about million dollars in the gross public debt during the half year Budget expenditures during the last half of will be determined by legislative action which has not been completed and by international conditions which will certainly bring about a large increase in defense expenditures. There is little speculative risk in assuming that economic activity will continue to increase however and it is possible to observe the effect upon the trend of budget receipts Expanding business is creating larger tax obligations for individual income taxes for corporation income taxes and for excise taxes. Not all of these greater liabilities will be represented in increased tax payments this year. Throughout corporations will be paying income taxes upon profits in the recession year and they will not pay taxes upon the higher profits of until next year. Most individuals who pay taxes upon estimates filed early in the year will not revise those estimates upward on account of the improvement in income occurring in until near the deadline which is next January Federal revenue from excise taxes responds more quickly to improving business and in the second quarter of the year receipts from this source began to grow. The same trend appeared in the very large item of income taxes paid by employers and withheld from wages of workers. This source of budget receipts accounted for billion dollars of Treasury revenue in the fiscal year just closed and in May and June these receipts were million dollars larger than in the same months of This was an increase of percent and reflects the inevitable result of greater employment higher wage rates and longer workweeks with overtime pay. The growth of economic activity in has already been great enough to assure a substantial increase in Federal revenues an appreciable part of which will be realized in the last half of the year limiting the deficit which is to be expected in that period of relatively low tax receipts Cash receipts of State and local governments ; the cash deficit. As was shown in table above incomplete information indicates that the steady upward trend in the cash receipts of State and local governments since the end of the war continued into the first half of this year. It is estimated that total cash receipts were running at an annual rate of about billion dollars during this period compared with about billion dollars in Reports on the finances of State and local governments are neither sufficiently complete nor sufficiently prompt to permit an analysis at the present time of the effects of the decline in business activity The steadily rising trend in State and local receipts is a reflection not only of rising economic activity but also of increased rates in old taxes and of widespread adoption of new taxes. Under the pressure of postwar financial needs State legislatures have been increasingly disposed both to adopt new State taxes and to grant wider tax authority to local governments and local governments have been prompt to take advantage of this As has been true throughout the postwar period the increase in the cash receipts of State and local governments was somewhat less than the increase : in cash payments and the cash deficit rose accordingly. It is estimated that the cash deficit during the first half of this year represented an annual rate of about billion dollars compared with billion in SUMMARY : THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET The economy in the second quarter of was producing goods and services at a rate of billion dollars per year. This is in the neighborhood of percent above the rate at midyear Since prices had not changed significantly over-all the dollar increase approximately reflects the real increase in economic activity by the second quarter. This carries us to a level of activity surpassing that of the second half of ( See table ) TABLE Indexes of gross national product current and constant prices [ First half of = seasonally adjusted ] Current prices Period First half Second half First half Second half Fiist half First quarter Second quarter * _ Constant prices _ Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers The rate of increase in production of goods and services from the fourth quarter of to the second quarter of this year if continued would be sufficient to provide full employment before the end of the year The Nation 's Economic Budget summarizes the main developments in national income and expenditures. ( See table and chart ) The largest increase in expenditures from the last half of to the first half of this year both in absolute terms and percentagewise was in business investment. Gross investment at an annual rate increased by billion dollars or about percent over the period compared with a rise in consumer expenditures of about billion dollars or about percent. Table which is derived from the national economic accounts presented in appendix A shows the areas in which expansion has taken place Most of the increase in private domestic investment is attributable to the swing from inventory liquidation in to inventory accumulation in resulting in an increase in effective demand of over billion dollars ( annual rate ) A second important contribution to the increase in private domestic investment was made by a rise of over percent in residential construction over the last half of last year ( seasonally adjusted ) TABLE The Nation 's Economic Budget [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] second half Economic group Receipts Expenditures first half i Excess of receipts Re ( ) or ceipts deficit ( ) Expenditures Excess of receipts ( ) or deficit ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable income relating to current production Government transfers and net interest payments Disposable personal income Expenditures for goods and services Personal savings ( } ) * & BUSINESS Retained business receipts from current production Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) INTERNATIONAL Government loan transfers abroad Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) +1>7 GOVERNMENT ( Federal State and local ) Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services Government transfers Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product Other adjustments Total : Gross national product _ Estimates based on incomplete data. See appendix A for first half Includes billion dollars ( billion at an annual rate ) of the nonrecurrent payments on the NSLI dividend NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; they are not included in the gross national product. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on data from the Department of Commerce and Bureau of the Budget. ( See appendix A. ) Outlays for producers ' durable equipment were somewhat higher in the first half of this year and in the second quarter increased substantially thus reversing the downward movement which had taken place since the peak The increase in consumer goods purchases can best be appraised in connection with a somewhat more detailed view of the receipts side of the Nation 's Economic Budget. ( See table ) CHART THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET Business investment rose about I0 ! /2billion dollars ( annual rate ) from the last half of to the first half of I960. Consumer expenditures increased about 3/ billion dollars which was much less than the increase in disposable income BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED CONSUMERS SECOND HALF I960 FIRST HALF BUSINESS SECOND HALF FIRST HALF INTERNATIONAL SECOND HALF FIRST HALF GOVERNMENT SECOND HALF FIRST HALF EXCESS OF RECEIPTS ( ) EXPENDITURES ( ) SECOND HALF FIRST HALF CONSUMERS BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENT SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX A TABLE Change in selected expenditure items of the Nation * s Economic Budget Change from second half to first half Expenditure items Billions of dollars * Consumer expenditures Durable goods.. _ _ Nondurable goods Services.. ._ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Government cash payments to the public Federal NSLI dividend Other State and local _ __ T ^ otal gross national expenditures- _ _ _ _. Gross private domestic investment Construction Residential ( nonfarm ) Nonresidential Producers ' durable equipment Change in inventories Percent Based on preliminary estimates for second half Annual rates ^ seasonally adjusted Source : See appendix A TABLE Change in selected receipt items of the Nation 's Economic Budget Change from second half to flrat half Receipt items Billions of dollars'2 Disposable personal income Government transfer payments and net interest NSLI dividend Other _ Income from current production Wages and salaries Farm income- _ _ _ Other income Less : Personal taxes Business receipts Corporate profits before tax. __ Inventory valuation adjustment Capital consumption allowances Less : Corporate taxes and dividends _ _ _ _ __. ' ' _ _. Cash receipts from the public Federal State and local Percent Total receipts relating to gross national product _ __ ________ _ Based on preliminary estimates for first half ; Annual rates seasonally adjusted Source : See appendix A In the first half of this year disposable income of consumers exceeded the rate of the last half of by about billion dollars or over percent. About half of this increase is attributable to the payment of the veterans ' dividend computed at an annual rate. However income derived from current production particularly wages business and profes- sional incomes dividends and rental incomes increased by nearly billion dollars or about percent. Only farm incomes showed a continued decline The fact that disposable personal income increased by percent and consumer expenditures by only about percent may in part be explained by the behavior of veterans who used a considerable portion of their dividend for payment of outstanding debts to accumulate liquid assets or to make payments on new homes. Another part of the dividend was used for the purchase of durable goods sales of which increased by percent in the first half of over the second half of The proportion of expenditures devoted to durable goods was higher than in any previous period postwar or prewar. Expenditures for nondurable goods increased scarcely at all. The disparity between the increase in durable and nondurable expenditures may reflect in part the nonrecurring special payments to veterans during the first half of the year The same factors that are reflected in the expenditure and receipt sides of the Nation 's Economic Budget also affect the relationship of saving and absorption of saving. ( See the third and sixth columns of table ) The increases in personal saving and in the Government cash deficit are both inflated by the receipt or payment of the veterans ' dividend during the first six months of this year which appears to be doubled when counted at an annual rate. Excluding the veterans ' dividend the combined cash deficit of Federal State and local governments ( expressed as a seasonally adjusted annual rate ) shows a substantial decline from the second half of The large increase in the excess of business investment over retained corporate receipts reflects the increase of funds spent for residential construction and especially for inventory accumulation. While several factors were of significance in the expansion of the last six months inventory movements were outstanding. This was true even before international events gave a new impetus to further inventory accumulation This analysis of the Nation 's Economic Budget indicates that the expansion of the last six months has rested not only upon the shift from inventory liquidation to accumulation and upon the payment of the extraordinary veterans ' dividend but also upon factors of more lasting duration Prior to the Korean development it was to be expected that the economy during the rest of the year would continue to move towards maximum employment and production in a steady manner. Since then the request for additional military appropriations and greatly accelerated consumer and business buying have resulted in an increasing threat of shortages price increases and other inflationary developments. It is with these most recent developments and the prospect of further developments initiated by the changed international situation that public policy must now concern itself Appendix A The Nation 's Economic Budget Contents Page A-l A-2 A-3 A-4 A-5 A-6 The Nation 's Economic Budget Consumer account Business account International account Government account ( Federal State and local ) Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing A-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function A Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years and Ill Appendix A The Nation 's Economic Budget Estimates of incomes, prices and production have always been used as an aid in the study of economic trends and business cycles. The need for national accounts on a systematic and current basis has become much more widely recognized in the postwar world however. A national economic policy whether it be for the purpose of raising living standards providing for national security obtaining a balance in international payments maintaining full employment or a combination of objectives requires informative and reliable national accounting Consequently there has been a concerted effort all over the world to develop better systems of measuring the sources and disposition of the Nation 's productive energies. In many countries these accounts are needed as a guide to internal development and investment policies whether carried out with foreign aid or by other means. In the United States the need for national accounts is implied in the task prescribed by the Employment Act of which requires setting forth foreseeable trends as well as the levels of employment production and purchasing power needed to carry out the policy of the act The Nation 's Economic Budget ( table A-l ) is a summary of the national accounts. It contains a number of the most significant magnitudes such as ( column ) the income of consumers the total cash revenues of the Government and business receipts which include corporate retained earnings and business reserves against depreciation. It also shows the gross output of the economy in current prices and the portion of that output which is bought by consumers business and Government ( column ) Column in the Nation 's Economic Budget " excess of receipts or deficit " includes consumer saving the Government cash surplus or deficit and the excess of gross investment over business receipts. The total excess of receipts must equal the total deficit since national income and product are conceptually equal. Consumer saving for example which is an excess of receipts must be matched by a deficit of receipts of business or Government or both In the Nation 's Economic Budget the main flows of income those arising from productive activity are shown in roman type in column and important supplementary flows Government interest payments and transfers to individuals are shown in italics. The items in roman type income arising from current production when added together provide one measure of current output of the economy. This measure is matched by the sum of expenditures for current output which is shown in roman type in column Government cash payments are broken into Government expenditure for goods and services ( current output ) and supplementary or transfer payments. The latter include transfers to individuals Government interest and cash loans to foreign countries or international organizations. The receipt of these items as mentioned before is shown in italics in column Transfer payments are equal to receipts of transfers just as expenditures for current production are equal to receipts While the Nation 's Economic Budget gives a comprehensive view of the economy additional detail is needed for analytical purposes. Such detail is shown in the tables that follow the " accounts " or sectors of the Nation 's Economic Budget. More complete statistics on national income and product and their constituents are published currently in the Survey of Current Business in the National Income and Product Supplements to the Survey and in the Budget of the United States. These are the primary sources from which the Nation 's Economic Budget is drawn. See also the Council 's Annual Review of January appendix A for a more extended discussion of the Nation 's Economic Budget The tables A-2 to A-5 which follow show the composition of the consumer business international and Government accounts. Tables A-6 A-7 and A-8 deal with the cash transactions of the Federal Government providing information on receipts and expenditures which are useful for economic analysis TABLE A The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] second half first half Excess of Economic group receipts Receipts Expend- ( ) or itures deficit ( ) Receipts Expenditures first half * Excess of Excess of receipts receipts ( -h ) or Receipts Expend- ( ) or itures deficit deficit ( ) ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable income relating to current production Government transfers and net interest payments Disposable personal income Expenditures for goods and services Personal savings ( -j- ) BUSINESS Retained business receipts from current production Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) INTERNATIONAL Government loan transfers abroad Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( -j- ) or investment ( ) GOVERNMENT ( Federal State and local ) Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services Government transfers Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) 2.S ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product Other adjustments Total : Gross national product See footnote on following page _ i Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; they are not included in the gross national product. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Explanatory notes : Lines : See table A-2 Consumer Account Lines : See table A-3 Business Account/ Lines : See table A-4 International Account Lines : See table A-5 Government Account Line : Includes the statistical discrepancy and the current surplus of Government enterprises less Government subsidies. The statistical discrepancy represents the difference between two in dependent estimates of gross national product : one arrived at by estimating the income received from current output and one by estimating expenditures for this output The adjustment fof statistical discrepancy brings the estimate on the receipts side-into agreement with that on the expenditure side of the accounts Line : An adjustment is necessary to balance the sum of the transfers on the receipts side with that on the payments side because of the fact that somewhat different bases for measurement have been used in estimating various components of receipts and payments. Most of the discrepancies reduce to a difference in timing between the recording of a receipt and a payment. A correction must be made for the difference between the time a tax liability is incurred or payments are made and the time a receipt is recorded by the Government Payment is sometimes made for goods produced in a previous period ; interest payments on a cash basis differ from the accrued interest shown under consumer receipts etc Sources : This table is based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce and on Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public estimated by the Bureau of the Budget : ; TABLE A Consumer account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or expenditures Total First half Second half first half i Personal income arising from current production of goods and services Wage and salary receipts and other labor income Farm proprietors ' income Business and professional income __ _ _ Dividends _ Private interest and rental income Business transfer payments Plus : Net interest paid by Government Dividend on National Service Life Insurance Other Government transfers to individuals Less : Consumer expenditures.. _ _ Equals : Personal saving _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ Durable goods Automobiles a n d parts. _ _ _ _ _ Other __ _ Nondurable goods. Food Clothing and shoes Other Services Housing _ _ Other _ __ Equals : Disposable personal income Equals : Total personal income _ Less : Personal tax and nontax payments ADDENDUM Personal income arising from current production Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable income arising from current production Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes adjustment for inventory valuation NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A Business account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or investment Second half First half Total first half i Plus : Capital consumption allowances * Corporate inventory valuation adjustment Equals : Retained business receipts from current production Less : Gross private domestic investment Corporate profits before tax Less : Corporate profits tax liabilities Dividends _ Equals : Corporate undivided profits _ C onstruction Residential ( nonfarm ) Other private construction _ _ __ Producers ' durable equipment Change in inventories Nonfarm only __ ._ _ ._- _ _. _ Equals : Excess of receipts } ( ) or investment ( ) __.. _ i Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes capital consumption allowance on corporate and noncorporate capital including residences This adjustment is required because corporate income is reckoned inclusive of changes in the book value of inventory as is customary in business accounting whereas only the value of the real change in inventories is counted as current output in the gross national product NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A International account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts or investment first half Total First half Second half _ Receipts : Net long-term loans * Payments to the International Monetary Fund and International Bank _ Total Government loan transfers abroad Investment : Surplus of exports of goods and services Less : Net unilateral transfers : Government6 Private Equals : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _ _ _ Estimates based on incomplete data * Includes only cash withdrawals under loan agreements. Does not include noncash transactions such as lend-lease and surplus property credits Cash payments on subscriptions. In the first half of the International Monetary Fund returned over million dollars of cash ( annual rate ) to the U. S. Treasury in exchange for United States notes Includes a seasonal adjustment in services * Net unilateral transfers are included with Government or private expenditures for goods and services For example remittances ( gifts ) made by American citizens to relatives or charitable groups abroad are included with consumer expenditure. Government aid in the form of grants is included in Government purchases of goods and services. Thus net unilateral transfers must be deducted from the export surplus to6avoid double counting Unilateral aid included in table A-8 is on a Daily Treasury Statement basis and is gross NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A Government account ( Federal ' State and local ) calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or expenditures Total Second half Receipts : Tax and nontax payments or liabilities : Federal State and local _ First half first half i Cash receipts from the public. _ Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services : Federal State and local Total _ Adjustment to cash basis : Noncash receipts Excess of cash receipts over tax liabilities or payments Total Other Government payments : Transfers to individuals Cash interest payments to the public Loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to 6the International Bank and International Monetary Fund All other Total. Cash surplus ( } ) or deficit ( ) Cash payments to the public Federal : C ash payments Cash receipts _ o Addendum _ _ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) ._ _ _ State and local : Cash payments Cash receipts _ _ _ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data Personal and indirect business tax payments corporation tax liabilities and contributions for social insurance Consists of deductions from Government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and Government 'contributions to retirement funds national service life insurance and Government life insurance funds Includes excess of corporation tax receipts over liabilities and excess of personal tax receipts over payments. Cash receipts also include some items of miscellaneous receipts not included in tax and non-tax payments such as receipts of sales from surplus property Does not agree with net interest paid by Government ( table A-2 ) which is on a net accrual basis and includes interest paid by Government corporations See table A-4 International account Includes all other cash payments less noncash payments for goods and services. Other cash payments include net payments by Government corporations ( except capital formation ) net prepayments and the excess of checks paid over checks issued. Noncash purchases of goods and services include deductions from Government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and the Government contribution to such funds NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Explanatory note This table reconciles cash receipts and payments to the public with estimates of Government receipts and expenditures included in the national income and product accounts. Cash receipts or payments represent the consolidated cash accounts of the Federal Government including the trust funds and State-local governments. All intragovernmental transactions are excluded. The receipts of Government corporations and the Post Office are offset against expenditures and the net expenditure included as a cash payment. Grantsin-aid to ] State and local governments are included as a cash payment of the Federal Government and not included as either a receipt or payment of the States or localities ICQ TABLE A Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Cash receipts Total Direct taxes on individuals Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes Excises and customs Surplus property receipts Deposits by States unemployment insurance ^ ^ _ _ _ ^ Veterans ' life insurance premiums Other _ Refunds of receipts _ _ ^ _ Total cash receipts _ First half Second half first half _ Estimates based on incomplete data Includes personal income taxes and estate and gift taxes NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Function Total National defense _ International affairs and finance Veterans ' services a n d benefits _ _ Social welfare health and security Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest on the public debt _ _ ._ Other Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Total Federal cash payments to the public _._ First half Second half first half M.2 M.4 Estimates based on incomplete data This figure takes into account the return of excess cash of over billion dollars ( annual rate ) to the U. S. Treasury by the International Monetary Fund for special United States notes. Without this transaction the figure would be billion dollars Includes over billion dollars resulting from a nonrecurring change in the method of reporting interest payments amounting to billion dollars at an annual rate in the last half of the year NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Payment Total Direct cash payments for goods and services : Payments to individuals for services rendered : Military _.__ __._ Civilian wages and salaries ( excluding Post Office ) : Defense * __ _ Other Federal Grants and loans in aid for performance of specified services net _ Total first halfi ( ) Loans and transfer payments to individuals : Social insurance and public assistance : Federal employees ' retirement benefit payments Old-age and disability benefit payments Unemployment insurance benefit payments. _ _ Grants-in-aid for public assistance _ Readjustment benefits pensions and other payments to veterans Loans to8 home owners net Interest Other ( ) ( fl ) Total Loans investments subsidies and other transfers to business and agriculture : Farmers : Price support ne't ( including supply programs ) International wheat agreement Other loans and direct subsidies to farmers Business : Home mortgage purchases from financial institutions. Loans net Direct subsidy payments Subsidy arising from postal deficit Interests Total Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions : European recovery program loans and grants Other loans ( net withdrawals ) Other grants u __ Subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund ( net cash withdrawals ) _- ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total Federal cash payments to the public Footnotes on * following * page Ill Clearing account and adjustment to Daily Treasury Statement Second half __ Payments to business for goods and services : Public works : Defense Other Federal _ _ Grants-in-aid and loans for public works Other goods and services : Defense.6 _ _ Civilian Payments to foreign countries and international institutions for goods and services.-._ _ Total First half Estimates based on incomplete data Differs from the national income concept of " Government purchases of goods and services " by excluding farm price support expenditures and unilateral aid to foreign countries. Grants to States and localities for public works here included as a Federal expenditure would be included in the national income accounts as3a State and local expenditure. There are other less significant differences between the two concepts Excludes terminal leave pay and food and clothing allowances which are primarily paid in kind Excludes payroll deductions for Federal employees ' retirement Includes all grants-in-aid and loans to public bodies for purposes other than public works and public assistance. Includes in addition one-third of Federal expenditures for veterans ' tuition books and supplies This figure is obtained as a residual by deducting all other expenditures from total cash payments to the public. Owing to the fact that data are incomplete for fiscal the residual would be subject to a high margin of error and has not been computed Includes cashing of terminal-leave bonds mustering-out pay and national service and Government life insurance refunds and benefits in addition to veterans ' pensions and readjustment benefits. Includes only one-third of payments for veterans ' tuition books and supplies s Includes a small amount of interest on tax refunds in addition to interest on the public debt. In addition it includes payments at an annual rate of billion dollars to business and billion dollars to individuals in the last half of resulting from a nonrecurring change in the method of reporting interest payments. Interest paid to business includes over million dollars of interest paid each year by the Federal Government to State and local governments. Interest in table A-2 is net and is on an accrual rather than a cash basis ; it includes interest paid by State and local governments and by Government corporations Less than million dollars Includes expenditures of Rural Electrification Administration formerly considered a grant-in-aid for public works. REA and Farmers Home expenditures are included on a gross rather than net basis Includes expenditures for Mutual Defense Assistance Program except for payment of an estimated million dollars in the first half of calendar to the Department of Defense for stocks transferred abroad NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Appendix B Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power CONTENTS National income or expenditure : B-l. Gross national product or expenditure B-2. Personal consumption expenditures B-3. Gross private domestic investment B-4. National income by distributive shares B-5. Personal income B-6. Relation of national income and personal income B-7. Disposition of personal income B-8. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and dollars Employment and wages : B-9. Labor force employment and unemployment B-10. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-ll. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries B-l2. Average hourly earnings in selected industries B-l Average weekly hours in selected industries Production and business activity : B-l4. Physical production index of goods and selected services B-15. Industrial production index B-16. New construction activity B-l Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-l8. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade B Manufacturers ' inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales B-20. Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Prices : B-21. Consumers ' price index B-22. Wholesale price index B-23. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Page Money banking and credit : Page B-24. Consumer credit outstanding B Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks B-26. Deposits and currency B-27. Estimated ownership of Federal securities B-28. Bond yields and interest rates selected years Corporate profits and finance : B-29. Profits before and after tax all private corporations B-30. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations B-31. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group B-32. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group B-33. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class B-34. Sources and uses of corporate funds International transactions : B-35. The international transactions of the United States B United States exports and imports of goods and services by area and B United States Government grants loans and other transfers to foreign countries B United States merchandise export surplus by area quarterly average and B United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and B United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and B Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and B-42. United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and B United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and B-44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and Summary : B-45. Changes in selected economic'series since and Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power TABLE B-l Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross national product Period 1941__ _ ._ ._ _ ._ GovernPersonal Gross consumpprivate Net foreign ment purchases of tion exdomestic investment goods and penditures investment services Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half _. First half * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ _ _ ._ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter __ _ __ The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Business " July Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Personal consumption expenditures l [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total exAutopendimotures Total biles Other Total Food ' Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other ings ing * and parts Period _ _. _ _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half ..__ First half First quarter Second quarter _ _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Business " July Includes alcoholic beverages Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel * Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings s Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-3. Gross private domestic investment. l [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm producers ' plant and equipment Total Farm gross equippriment vate and domesEquip- Con- con3 tic Total ment struc- struction tion nvest ment Period Residential construction ( nonfarm ) Net change in business inventories Other priNonvate confarm after struction Total revalu- Farm ation adjustment _ ! -_ _. _ ( ) ! s ( ) ( ) o Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half a First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Departmen of 2Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Business " July Items for and earlier years are not comparable with those for later years nor with figures shown in Table B-16. Revisions of construction estimates noted under Table B-16 have been incorporated in Table B-3 for and subsequent years only Total producers ' durable equipment less " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " These figures assume that farmers purchase and percent respectively of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes * Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages. Includes hotel construction prior to only fi Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " ( See footnote ) Includes construction of hotels tourist cabins motor courts and dormitories since only Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional and miscellaneous nonresidential Less than million dollars s Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B ~ ~ National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Business and professional income and inventory valuation InComadjustment Total pencome nation- sation of al In- In- farm in- of emprocome ven- priecome ploytory of ees3 unin- valu- tors Total corpo- ation rated adenter- justprises ment Period Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Rental inNet come In- interof Cor- ven- est perpo- tory sons rate valuTotal prof- ation its adbefore justtax * ment ( ) _ _. __ ! ( ) Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter i The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Business " July I960 * National income is the total net income earned in producti on by individuals and businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix table B-5 ) and employer and employee contributions for social insurance * See appendix table B-29 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-5. Personal income 1929-50l [ Billions of dollars ] Total personal income Period Salaries wages and other labor income Proprietors ' and rental income Dividends and personal interest4 income Transfer payments Nonagricultural personal income _ _ _ _ _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half _ Second half First half ._ First quarter Second quarter. _. Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Business " July Differs from " compensation of employees " in appendix table B-4 in that it excludes employer and employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor incomecompensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims See appendix table B-4 for major components : business and professional income income of farm proprietors and rental income See appendix table B-6 for dividend payments and net interest paid by Government and table B-4 for other net interest payments Equals personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Relation of national income and personal income 50l [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Plus : CorpoExcess rate of Nation- profits Contri- wage and in- butions acal to income ventory social cruals valu- insur- over disation ance burseadjustments ment Period Government transfer payments Net interBusi- Equals : perest ness sonal paid Divi- trans- income by dends fer Govpayernments ment ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ _ _ _ _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half _ _ First half First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter __ _. -_ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter _-_ The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of 2Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current of Business " July Less than million dollars * Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) ISO TABLE B-7. Disposition of personal income 1929-50l Personal income Period Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Less : Equals : Equals : Disposa- Personal Personal conble sumption net personal expendi- saving income tures Net saving as percent of disposable income Billions of dollars _ ._ _ _ _ _ | Annual rates seasonally adjusted Fjrst half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter _ First half Second half i The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Departmen t of Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Business,' ' July Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-8. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and dollars Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Period Current prices prices Population ( thousands ) ._- _ ._ .__ ---_ _ ._ Current prices Consumers ' price index ( = ) prices Per capita disposable income ( dollars ) <76.7 < <84.4 <94.3 Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter _._ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter __ The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of 2Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Business " July Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the consumers ' price index on the base = to give a rough measure of changes in buying power of disposable personal income Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period interpolated from published monthly estimates. Population in continental United States is currently estimated at on April according to preliminary counts for the Census ; including armed forces overseas it is Estimates made prior to the Census results and used'in this table put total population including armed forces overseas at on April which is higher than the first official results of the Census Intercensual estimates used here for through second quarter of will be adjusted later to take care of this small difference The consumers ' price index has been roughly adjusted to take account of the understatement during the price-control period. This adjustment is in line with the report of the Technical Committee ( better known as the Mitchell committee ) on the consumers ' price index. The unadjusted index will be found in appendix table B-21 * Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor ( except as noted ) TABLE B-9. Labor force employment and unemployment Civilian labor force Total labor force ( includ- Armed forces * ing armed1 forces ) Period Employment Total civilian labor force Total Agri- Nonagricultural cultural Unemployment Unemployment as percent of total civilian labor force Thousands of persons years of age and over Monthly average : ~ -First half Second half First half January February March April May June July August September October __ _ November December January February March April May June -_ _ _ _ _ Data for exclude about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the census. This figure is deducted by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with data Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary lay-off and industrial disputes NOTE. Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the month Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE B-10. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments 1929-50l [ Thousands of employees ] Total wage and salary workers Period Montly average : Manufacturing Total Gov ^ ransernCon- portament tract tion FiNon- Min- con- and Trade nance Serv- ( FedDura- dura- ing struc- ublic ( ) ice a eral ble State tion utilible goods goods and ties local ) ( ) __. First half Second half _ ( ) i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) January _...-February March April May June July August September _. October NovemberDecember-. January February March April4 May * June * First half Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors selfemployed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce ( appendix table B-9 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary lay-offs and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments * Data for the trade and service divisions beginning with are not comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division Not available Estimates based on incomplete data ' Data reflect work stoppages in bituminous coal mining NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-l Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : Bitumi- Build- Class I nous ng con- steam Tele- Whole- Ketail Hotels sale ( year Dura- Noncoal strucrail- phone trade trade round ) ble durable mining tion roads goods goods ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ $ M7.94 ( ' ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( a ) ( ) ( ' ) C2 ) $ $ $ First half Second half- _ First half January February March April _ May June July August September _ _ October November.. December ? January February March April 8<L__ May June * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included Not available Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers hi manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE B Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : Bitumi- Build- Class I nous ing con- steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels railsale ( year Dura- Noncoal struc- roads phone trade trade round ) ble durable mining tion goods goods $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ First half Second half- _ 1950-Firsthalf6.. January February March April MayJune July August September. _ October November- _ December January February March April _ MayZe June _ __ _ ._ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C22 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) C ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C2 ) C2 ) C2 ) ( ) $ Money payments only : additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included ' Not available Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insuance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and havejbeen carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source ; Department of Labor TABLE B-13. Average weekly hours in selected industries Manufacturing Bitumi- Build- Class I ing steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels nous ( year consale railNoncoal Durable durable mining struc- roads phone trade trade round ) Total goods tion goods Period Monthly average : C1 ) C1 ) ) C1 ) ( ( ) ( ) ) ) ( ( ) ) ) ) ) ( ( ) C1 ) ( ( _ ) ) ( ( ( ( ( 1947_ ( ) ( ( ) ( C ) C1 ) ( ) C1 ) ( ( ) ( ( ) ) ) ( ( ) ( ( ' ) ) ) ( ) ( < ) ) ) ) ) First half Second half. _ First half < _ _ _ January February March April _ May June July August- September _._ October November December January February March April < May * June ) ( ) ) C1 ) C1 ) ( ) _ ( ( ) ) ) ( ( ( ) ) ( Not available Average for year not available because new series was started in April Beginning with June data relate to nonsupervisory employees only Not strictly comparable with previous data * Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of bor TABLE B-14. Physical production index of goods and selected services [ = ] Production of selected services Production of goods Nonagricultural production Period Total Agriprocultural duction proof goods duction Weights : Total Nonagricultural Total Industrial production Construction Electric and gas utilities TeleTrans- phone porand tation telegraph _ First half Second half ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) First half _ ( ) ( * ) ( ) All half-year data have been seasonally adjusted except the electric and gas utilities for which no satisfactory adjustment factor is available Computed from the Department of Commerce national income data. The weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the total for the industries. The agriculture weight excludes net rents paid by landlords living on farms imputed rents and subsidy payments. The weight for construction has been adjusted to include force account and other construction done outside of the contract construction industry the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction. Manufactures and minerals of the industrial production index were weighted into the total indexes separately but only the total industrial production index is shown here. See appendix table B-15 for the individual components of the index of industrial production Not available * Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. A composite index of production of goods and services has not been compiled because of the inadequate data for measuring the production of services. The only service production data used were for transportation and for communications by telephone and telegraph. Data for measuring such services as wholesale and retail trade finance insurance real estate Government and communication other than telephone and telegraph were inadequate for separate indexes and for an index for all services other than transportation telephone and telegraph Sources : Based on the following data : Agricultural production : Department of Agriculture index of /arm output which measures the physical volume of farm production for human use Industrial production : Federal Reserve index of industrial production Construction : Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated by their index of construction costs and converted into relatives with as Electric and gas utilities : Based on the following series : Electric power produced by utilities as reported by the Federal Power Commission and sales of manufactured and mixed gas to consumers as reported by the American Gas Association. The two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period as The relative series are combined into an index with electric power given a weight of and gas the respective percentages of the revenues of each of the utilities to the total revenues produced by both in the base period Transportation : Department of Commerce index of transportation Telephone and telegraph : Based on Department of Labor production indexes for and on a series of Works Progress Administration for These indexes are for class A telephone carriers and the principal wire-telegraph and ocean-cable carriers which file annual reports with the Federal Communications Commission TABLE B-15. Industrial production index [ = adjusted for seasonal variation ] Period Monthly average : _. Total industrial production Manufactures Minerals Total Durable Nondurable First half... Second half. 1950-Firsthain. January February March April May. June July August September. October November.. December.. January February... March April May ' June * ____ Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Eeserve System TABLE B-16. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Public construction Total Resi- NonNonresinew Mili- resicon- Total den- den- Other tial tial Total tary den- High- Other struc- pri- buildpripubtion i vate and tial ing build- vate public naval build- ways lics ing ( non- ( noning farm ) farm ) Period _ _ Annual rates adjusted for seasonal variation First half January __ _ February March April May June July August September _ October __ _ November December January February March April M a y4 June First half Second half _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product Includes public utility farm and other private construction not separately'shown Includes residential sewer and water miscellaneous public service enterprises conservation and development and all other public construction not separately shown * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Series revised to include architectural and engineering fees land development costs and profits on land development operative builders ' margins additions and alterations dormitories and other shelter in " private residential building " ; privately-owned sewage disposal and water supply facilities and privatelyowned toll bridges and roads parks playgrounds race tracks stadiums swimming pools and similar recreational facilities in " other private construction " ; and construction of atomic energy facilities in " public construction. " For detail see Construction and Construction Materials Statistical Supplement May Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE B-17. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Transportation Total i Period Other ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total _ Manufacturing Mining ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Commercial and miscellaneous Electric and gas utilities ( ) Railroad ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter5 Third quarter _ _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter Excludes agriculture Commercial and miscellaneous include trade service finance and communication for all years shown Prior to miscellaneous also included transportation other than railroad and electric and gas utilities which are not available separately for these years s Not available separately for years prior to Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to * Estimates for second and third quarters of are based on anticipated capital expenditures of business NOTE. These figures do not agree with those shown in column of table B-3 and included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest million dollars Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) '31 TABLE B Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade [ Adjusted for seasonal variation ] l Inventories w CQ Ratio of a ^ inventori monthly sal Inventories i Period Millions of dollars < * jg Millions of dollars S Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales Millions of dollars Retail trade Inventories l tn OT K ^ en Q } Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales ' O bfi-t- n Wholesale trade Inventories * Millions of dollars Manufacturing Ratio of average i n v e n t o r i e s to monthly sales * Total manufacturing and trade _ First half. _. Second half. January February. March April May June July August September. October November. JDecember- _ 36r391 January February. _ March April4 May Book value end of period Monthly average shown for year and half year and total for month * Average inventories based on centered averages of end-of-period figures < Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-19. Manufacturers ' " inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales [ Not adjusted for seasonal variation ] Total manufacturing Period Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Durable goods industries Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Nondurable goods industries Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales i MateMateMaterials rials rials FinFinFinand and and ished goods ished goods ished goods goods goods goods in in in process process process Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales * MateMaterials rials FinFinand and ished goods ished goods goods goods in in process process First half Second half- _ _ May June. _ July August September. ._ October November. December January February March _ April January. _ February March April May Average inventories based on centered averages of end-of-period figures Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce '33 TABLE B Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Millions of dollars Period Sales ( total for month ) Monthly average : Stocks ( end of month ) Outstanding orders ( end of month ) Ratio of stocks to sales Ratio of orders to sales Ratio f orders to stocks First half Second half First half _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May Not adjusted for seasonal variation Not available s Estimates based on incomplete data Note : These figures represent retail sales stocks and outstanding orders as reported by a sample of ot the larger department stores located in various cities throughout the country and are not estimates of total sales stocks and outstanding orders for all department stores in the United States. Data are not available prior to ' Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System '34 TABLE B-21. Consumers ' price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ = ] All items Period Food Apparel Rent Fuel elec- House tricity furMisceland re- nish- laneous frigerings ation _ ] _ _ _ _ _ ._ First half. _ _ Second half _ First half January February March April May June July August September ._ October November December ^ January February March 15_ April May June _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Source : Department of Labor '35 TABLEfB-22. Wholesale price index [ = ] Period __ Is * ! oa o * a S H * H * f d if I S M S is i " c3 rj M S3 s> " s | i K> -H O SB o> * w o o ^ Monthly average : Farm products All commodities Other than farm products and foods B _ PR i z * a w .S3 S First half Second half First half January February March April.. May June July August September October November December January February March April. May June- Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-23. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio l [ = ] Prices received Period Prices paid ( including in terest taxes and wage rates ) Parity ratio Monthly average : _ First half Second half. _ s First half January February _ March April May _ June July ._ August September October November December January February March April May June Revised series ; see Agricultural Prices Supplement No. January for details ; Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) Includes subsidy payments between October and June Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-24. Consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Total consumer credit End of period Instalment credit Total Automobile sale credit Other * Charge accounts Other consumer credit January February. March April May _ _ _ _ June _ _ _ _ _ July August _ _ September _ _ October November December January February March Aprils May June _ ._ Includes other sale credit and loans including repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Administration Includes single-payment loans of commercial banks and pawnbrokers and service credit Estimates based on incomplete data ; June by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks [ Billions of dollars ] Weekly reporting member banks All commercial banks End of period Total loans and investments June June June June June Total U. S. Government obligations Other securities Total loans Commercial industrial and agricultural loans January February March April May June July August _ _ September October November December I960 January February March _ April44 May June _ _ _ _ -_ _. _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ __ June Loans June Investments Reporting date nearest end of period June data are used because complete end-of-year data prior to are not available for U. S. Government obligations Not available prior to May when the loan classification was revised < Estimates for all commercial banks based on incomplete data ; June by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-26. Deposits and currency [ Millions of dollars ] Foreign United Total States bank deposits and deposits Government currency ( net ) balances a End of period * Deposits adjusted and currency ( privately held money supply ) Total Demand Time Currency deposits outside adjusted deposits banks 1934__ January February _ March April May ._June July _ August September October November December _ _ _._ _ _ _ _ January February * March * April68 May June * -_ i Reporting date nearest end of period * Includes Treasury cash and balances at commercial savings and Federal Reserve banks Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System Estimates based on incomplete data ; June by Council of Economic Advisers Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-27. Estimated ownership of Federal securities [ Billions of dollars par values l ] Gross debt and guaranteed obligations outstanding Held by public Held by U.S Government Total a State agencies Total and local Com- Federal and trust held by govern- mercial Reserve public ments banks * banks funds End of period Nonbank private corpoIndirations viduals8 and associations January. _ February.. _ March April May June July August September October November. _ _ December January February March April May June _ _ _ _ * United States saving bonds series A-D E and F are included at current redemption values Securities issued or guaranteed by the U. S. Government excluding guaranteed securities held by the Treasury Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and Territories and insular possessions Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and insular possessions ; excludes securities held in trust departments Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations dealers and brokers and foreign accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government ; beginning with June they include holdings of Federal land banks * Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE B-28. Bond yields and interest rates selected years> [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government security yields Period High grade corporate bond yields ( Moody 's ) Bank rates on shortterm business loans Bankers acceptances daysNew York Long-term bonds month certifiAaa cates of years bonds indebted- Partially and over taxness exempt taxable Baa bonds ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Federal Reserve Bank discount rateNew York ) ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) First quarter Second quarter ( ) ( ) average average average average average _ __ average average. average average. average average average _ Tax exempt prior to March ; taxable thereafter Average of yields on all outstanding partially tax-exempt Government bonds due or callable after years in and ; and after years from Not available From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less No partially tax-exempt bonds due or callable in years and over Beginning June series is based on three note issues maturing July Sources : Treasury Department Moody 's Investors Service and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-29. Profits before and after iax ^ all private corporations ^ ] [ Billions of dollars Corporate profits after tax Corporate profits before tax Corporate tax liability LO Period ._ Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits W Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ First quarter Second quarter __ The figures for are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of 2Commerce. For detail see the " Survey of Current Bvsiness " July Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Minus million dollars * Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix table B-4 for profits before tax and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-30. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations [ Millions of dollars ] Nondurable goods industries ( corporations ) * Durable goods industries ( corporations ) Period Profits Profits Sales Sales Before taxes After taxes Before taxes After taxes Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter See Federal Reserve Bulletin June and subsequent issues for similar data for the following industry groups : primary metals and products machinery automobiles and equipment foods and kindred products chemicals and allied products and petroleum refining NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published reports of various industrial corporations TABLE B Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders * equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group Percentage ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Industry group total Total first First Second Third Fourth quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Before Federal taxes Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal ._ _ Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries All private manufacturing corporationsFood Tobacco manufactures _ __ Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products ._ _ Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel andfinishedtextiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures _ _ Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries All private manufacturing corporations Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and " parts. .._ Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Source : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Profits in cents per dollar of sales Industry group total Total First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter first quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures. _ Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products __ Furniture and fixtures ._ Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) _ _ _ Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products __ Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries. _ Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products.. _ _ ._ Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts. Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) G.I 'o ! After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products _ Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products _ Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery _ _ _ _ Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles Motor vehicles and partsInstruments ; photographic and optical goods * watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-33. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class Assets class ( thousands of dollars ) total First quarter Total Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter first quarter Ratio of profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to 249_250to999._- to to and over- _ _ Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to to to and over- ! Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes _ _ _ to ^ to to to and over Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to _ to to to and over Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission H7 TABLE B-34. Sources and uses of corporate funds 1946-50l [ Billions of dollarsl Half year totals Annual totals Source or use of funds Uses : Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Change in customer receivables Cash and U. S. Government securities Other current assets first half first half Sources : Internal : Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation allowances Total internal sources ( ) _ Total uses External : Change in trade debt Change in Federal income tax liability Other current liabilities Change in bank loans Change in mortgages _ _ _ _ Net new issues ) ^ i ( ) Total external sources Total sources Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) Excludes banks and insurance companies Not adjusted for seasonal variation aEstimates based on incomplete data ; retained profits and depletion allowances by Council of Economic Advisers * Less than million dollars Sources : Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE B-35. The international transactions of the United States [ Millions ^ ! dollars ] Type of transaction Exports of goods and2 services : Recorded goods Other goods3 total total First Third Fourth First Total quarter Second quarter quarter quarter Second quarter uarter Total goods Services Income on investments. _. ( ) ( ) Total exports _ __ Imports of goods and services : Recorded goods _ _ Other goods Total goods Services Income on investments.. Total imports Surplus of export of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods Total goods Services Income on investments. _ Total means of financing Errors and omissions ( ) ( ) ( << ) ( ) ( ) i ( ) Total surplus of exports- Means of financing surplus of exports of goods and services : Liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries Dollar disbursements by : International Monetary Fund International Bank. United States Government sources : Unilateral transfers _ Long- and short-term loans United States private sources : Remittances Long- and short-term capital ( ) ( ) '86 -28C > Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Figures for recorded exports of goods in have been adjusted to include goods shipped to United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas in order to make them comparable with figures for subsequent years. Such shipments are included in exports as recorded by the Bureau of the Census beginning in but were not so included in prior years a Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United States customs area and other adjustments < Not available * All figures for means of financing are on a net basis Excludes subscription to the capital of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund. For detail see table B-37 ' Excludes million dollars of long-term and million dollars of short-term notes guaranteed by the International Bank Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) '49 TABLE B United States exports and imports of goods and services by area and [ Billions'lof dollars ] Annual rates Area First Second Third Fourth First Second quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter ter ter ter Export surplus of goods and services : Total ERP countries. ERP dependencies.. Europe except ERP countries Canada and Newfoundland... [ Latin-American Republics \ Other I ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) I- Exports of goods and services : Total ERP countries ERP dependencies Europe except ERP countries-.23 Canada and Newfoundland ( Latin- American Republics { Other * _ I ERP countries ERP dependencies Europe except ERP countries-.13 Canada and Newfoundland ( Latin- American Republics | { Other < I Imports of goods and services : Total Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Includes income on investments Not available < Includes international institutions NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) i no ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) TABLE B U. S. Government grants loans and other transfers to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid total total A. Unilateral payments : UNRRA and post-TJNRRA Civilian supplies distributed by the armed forces Transfers to Philippines _ Chinese aid Korean aid program Greek-Turkish aid International Refugee Organ89 ization Interim aid _ _ European recovery program Other Total unilateral payments- Less unilateral receipts Equals : Net unilateral payments B. Long-term loans and investments : Lend-lease credits Surplus property including ship sales _ Export-Import Bank loans United Kingdom loan Subscriptions toInternational Bank International Monetary Fund European Recovery Program Other _ Total First Second Third Fourth First Second quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter ter ter ter i 20< * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Equals net long-term loans and investments including International Bank and International Monetary Fund-__ Less subscriptions to International Bank and International Monetary Fund___ Total long-term loans and investments Less repayments _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Equals net long-term loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Monetary Fund C. Outflow of short-term capital ( net ) Total net unilateral payments loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Monetary Fund ( A+B-j-C ) ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers a Not available Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-38.- -United States merchandise export surplus by area quarterly average and Total merchandise Canada export surplus Period Other Western Hemisphere ERP countries Other Europe Asia Australia and Oceania Africa Millions of dollars Quarterly average : _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ n ( ) ( ) First quarter Second quarter __ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter. Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to and imports from Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to trade with the three western zones Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding in this table and in tables B-39and B-42 Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and Total Other exports includ- Canada J Western Hemiing sphere eexports Period ERP countries Other Europe Asia Australia and Africa Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter _ _ ( ) ( < ) < ) ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( < ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter. _ Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to exports to the three western zones * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise including reexports shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-40. United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and Total domestic exports Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter ! Second quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ _ First quarter * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisors Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all domestic merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of roundingj Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and [ = ] Total domestic exports Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Unit value indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including change in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. The indexes for to are based on data which include goods destined to the United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and Period Total general Canaimports da ! Other Western Hemisphere ERP countries a Other Europe Asia Australia and Africa Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. First quarter _ a__ Second quarter ( ( ( ( ) ( < ) ( ) CO Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to imports from the three western zones Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising channels plus entries into bonded customs warehouses Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source * Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-43. United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and Period Total imports for consumption Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Imports for consumption include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels plus withdrawals from bonded customs warehouses for consumption Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and [ = ] Total imports for consumption Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanu- Finished manufacfactures tures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : _ iFirst quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Unit value indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _-_ _ __ First quarter NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-45. -Changes in selected economic series since and = Source : Appendix table No Economic series Total First half Second half Percentage change to first half Prom Prom second first first half half half B-l__- Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures -Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services ( ) ( ) B-4..._ National income Compensation of employees _ B-7- Personal income Disposable personal income Personal net saving B-8. Per capita disposable personal income : Current dollars _ dollars B-9..._ Labor force including armed forces Civilian labor force Employment Nonagricultural Agricultural Unemployment B-ll... Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing Bituminous coal mining Building construction B-14.._ Physical production index of goods and selected services : Total Agricultural Nonagricultural ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i ( ) ( ) B-15... Industrial production * Total Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures Minerals B-16-- New construction : Total Private Residential __ Nonresidential Other private public B-17.... Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Inventories ' Total Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail Sales ' Total Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail _ B B-21... Consumers ' price index : All items Food Apparel Rent See footnotes at end of table p. TABLE B-45. Changes in selected economic series since and Continued Percentage change to first half = Source : Appendix table No Economic series Total B-22... Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products Foods Other than farm products and foods First half Second half From From first second first half half half B-24... Consumer credit outstanding end of period B-29... Corporate profits : Profits before taxes Profits after taxes Dividend payments Undistributed profits B Prices received by farmers Prices paid by farmers ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) _ B-39... Merchandise exports including reexports B-42 General merchandise imports. i Estimates based on incomplete data J Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from the indexes shown here Indexes not computed because of negative values Not available ' average = ] 6o